Sid Meier’s 


CIVILIZATION 


Build An Empire To Stand The Test Of Time 





CIVILIZATION” 


Computer Simulation 


Microprose Software 
180 Lakefront Drive, Hunt Valley, MD 21030 
(301) 771-1151 


All rights reserved. 
Copyright © 1991 MicroProse Software, Inc. 


This book may not be reproduced in whole or in part by mimeograph or any other means without 
permission, with the exception of quoting brief passages for the purposes of reviews. 


Printing History 
First Printing 1991 
Printing 987654321 


Civilization is MicroProse Software's trademark for its simulation of Human History. 
IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. 
Tandy is a registered trademark of Tandy Corporation. 
AdLib is a registered trademark of AdLib Incorporated. 
Roland MT-32 is a registered trademark of RolandCorp, USA. 
Apple and Macintosh are registered trademarks of Apple Computer, Inc. 


CREDITS 


GAME DESIGN 
Sid Meier 
with Bruce Shelley 


ORIGINAL IBM PROGRAMMING 
Sid Meier 


ORIGINAL IBM COMPUTER GRAPHICS 

Michael Haire 

Harry Teasley 

Barbara Bents 

Todd Brizzi 

Stacey Clark 

Brian Martel 

Errol] Roberts 

Nicholas Rusko-Berger 


ORIGINAL IBM MUSIC COMPOSITIONS 
Jeffery L. Briggs 


CIVLOPEDIA 
B.C. Milligan 
Jeffery L. Briggs 
Bruce Shelley 


ORIGINAL IBM SOUND EFFECTS 
Ken Lagace 
Jim McConkey 


DOCUMENTATION 
Bruce Shelley 


EDITORS 
B.C. Milligan 
Paul Murphy 


MANUAL DESIGN 
Susan Ullrich 
Iris Idokogi 


MANUAL LAYOUT 
Terry Rund 


ILLUSRATIONS 


Laurie Baker 


MANUAL GRAPHICS 
Susan Ulhich 
Terry Rund 


PACKAGE DESIGN 
Moshe Milich 


ORIGINAL VERSION QUALITY ASSURANCE 
Al Roireau 
Chris Taormino 
Tim Train 
Chris Clark 
Mike Corcoran 


ADDITIONAL PLAYTESTING 
Arnold Hendrick 
Sandy Petersen 
Jim Synoski 
Scott Patterson 
B.C. Milligan 
Doug Whatley 
Paul Murphy 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 






















TITLE PAGES........ 
GAME CREDITS . 
TABLE OF CONTENTS u...cccccccccccccctessersesesneaeeees 4 
1. INTRODUCTION... wid 
Introduction 0.0... ail 
Cities and Civilizations... ae) 
Before You Start ........... .13 
Interface Introduction. 14 
Pre-Game Options viii 16 
The Game Turn..... 
Date......... 
Disasters...... 
City Check... 
Movement and Combat ........ 0.0000 c cece eee 19 
End of Turn.........cc0ee veld 
AGULAHON sescecssacss ecivtesescosiseornertaarn nerves 20 
Ending the Game and Winning «0... 
ricinio Plays. io riecs sa.chdatiuietedidteg ess eters 
Winning ......000cc00. 
The Hall of Fame 
2 THE WORED: aiivieverctiontiniiaiitioniindawedenieees 
The World Map 
World Geography ........ 00.00 cece eee cece eee a vs) 
Special ReSOULCES ........6 cece eee ee 2 
Minor Tribes.............04. 
The Map Display ......... 
Map Window .. 
World WindOW so csc’. spieccadhacitnaiaecsacneate dee eats 
Meritt Batts vipauthcen nates eth aethneatt titrant rad orate Mead 
Palace WindoW...........ceeeeeeeee 


The Status Report 
Unit Identification Window ......... 00.00 e ees 32 


Settlers, Soldiers, and ENVOYS... 33 
Movement 


Settlers iy ia 
Diplomats: £...i scree laiantsssad cenesus inna 37 
CALAVANS sii ieiicus daciavsuiiessrirnsdeocdia rth ovlaucioan 39 
ilitary Units 4 
Barbarians... 
Governments ..... : 
VPEScsievircricenipciaipainerancsenes cit inien via yadweeatel 
Revolitioniss: acs very vans adisdeereuqadente he tebjanea : 
Advisors/World Reports .... 
City Stats s.scac.cvaeassdeae 
LlitaryACVISOr eshte tiaawhe prone yinnonbatte,sa ee 
Intelligence Advisor... 0. cece cece eee eee ee 
Attitide Advisoteis.ssasy cits etecseye tees na eves cata we 4 
ade ACVISOL...... ce ceseeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeaee sense 
Science Advisor 
Wonders of the World 
OPOCitles ens. Mad weeeats asap anil iiay eset aoe 
Civilisation Scores jected eleva soit ead 
World Maps secicncry over sarnenyteniee, ata aianiey bak gat 
Spaceships..........00004 
Demographics . 
Civilopedia cin 
Planetary Caretaking ....... 
Industrial Pollution .... . igs 
Cleanup: sees csnceseets 
Effects. wtivianerthedesneas a 
Monitoring Pollution .........:ccccce ccc e ci 53 
Global Warming: 3ccu aiisdnans inci Sante totes Vite 53 
Nuclear Pollution’... scsistcasivoeveresaveas caren 5A 



























Diplomacy .... 
Peace ., 
The Space Race... 
Spaceships . 
Construction........ 





























Components .. st 8 

Modules ,.., a 

DHUCHHTES et crsacnicnegiet sl itdeuitseddonpe entre et om 59 

BECLEIES ii cciserccagrtiee doierstr od oni hel nae teeta cents 

Cities. iavsitigadiicl he daatnia aia 

New Cities cis. ieciiscivi vate tiacuniagnenived 

Placing New Cities......... 

City Management .... 

City Protection............04 a 

Civil Disorder si sits: cont ashe ndendenseat wean iaecsas 

We Love the (King) Day ' 
The City Display .............. 

City Map... 

City Resources Window 

Population Roster: ici. a natin sranneunmianedeeiuen 

Specialists ...... 

Food Storage Box .. . a4 re 

Prodtiction BOX 2) scscitds ousted ance vandie stee cv gee amenien 

Improvements Roster 

Home City Roster 

Information Window ..... Dd 
City Improvements ............... 78 
Wonders of the World ... 82 

Construction ...... 82 

Effects ........ 83 

Antiquity.......cccc sfif ano 

The Middle Ages ..... 84 

The Industrial Age... 86 
PES A STOLE -sacsacnse hides cich se vecrutdavesiavavasieeen tadeaiasaveveceece 88 


4. THE DYNAMICS OF CIVILIZATION ............... 91 


TntrOductint vesssccisticin veagnn tesivesa cs 
The Advance of Knowledge 





5. ADDITIONAL NOTES oo. 411 


Leader Biographies 
Players’ Notes ......... 
Designers’ Notes .... 
Further Reading ..... ‘ 
TNA OX tortie phasis edie stalin est vnieaianie ste edi ee ie a 

Copyright Notice/Warranty ........ccccceeeeen 127 
Civilization Advances Chart wc 129 








Advanced Flight 
(Flight & Electricity) 


ees Bomber Unit 


Carrier Unit 





INTRODUCTION 





INTRODUCTION 


Civilization casts you in the role of the ruler of an entire civilization through many 
generations, from the founding of the worlds first cities 6,000 years in the past to the imminent 
colonization. of space. It combines the forces that shaped history and the evolution of 
technology in a competitive environment. You have great flexibility in your plans and 
strategies, but to survive, you must successfully respond to the forces that historically shaped 
the past. 

When play begins, your civilization is small and requires only a few decisions each turn. 
But each decision can have important ramifications later. A number of innovative displays 
make it easy to understand the issues and implement action. If you prove an able ruler, your 
civilization grows larger and even more interesting to manage. Inevitable contact with 
neighbors opens new doors of opportunity treaties, embassies, sabotage, trade, and war. 

As tirne passes,the number of important decisions required each turn increases. First you 
must think tactically. location of cities, production of military units or city improvements, 
exploration of the immediately surrounding lands. Soon, strategic plans must be formulated: 
war or peace with immediate neighbors, when to explore and expand overseas, when to 
change” your type of government, whereto focus technological research. 

The success of the civilization that you build depends upon your decisions. As ruler, you 
manage the economy, diplomacy, explorations, technology research, and war machine. Your 
policies must be flexible in an evolving world. Military units inevitably become obsolete and 
need replacement as more advanced technologies appear. The balance of power among your 
rivals can shift. Economic and governmental policies may have to be modified, lest you fall 
behind in critical technologies. 


Alphabet 





The past civilizations of Alexander the Great, the Hittites, Napoleon, Genghis Khan, and 
others all held pride of place on the world’s stage at one time, but all eventually collapsed. You 
are challenged in Civilization to build an empire that stands the test of time. You may succeed 
where your predecessors failed. If you locate cities properly, build them soundly, defend them 
aggressively, and neutralize the danger from potential enemies, the descendants of your tribe 
may not only survive, but lead the colonization of space. 


CITIES AND CIVILIZATIONS 


Civilizations appeared as agriculture and technology developed to the point where 
humankind could gather and live in cities. With only part of the population needed to provide 
food for all, the rest could afford to specialize in the tool making, trading, engineering, and 
managing that urbanization made possible. Specialization improved efficiency and produc- 
tion. Cities encouraged a rapid exchange of ideas. A teacher could reach many students at 
once, not just a few. 

City residents cultivated the nearby fields, logged the forests, and gathered fish from the 
rivers, returning each night with the result of their labors. This produce and raw material was 
bartered in the city markets for the goods and services of others. Charcoal from one area and 
iron ore from another might be taken to the town smelter who made the iron that the 
blacksmith turned into tools. 

But cities developed unique problems. As they grew in size it became more difficult to 
provide sufficient food from nearby farmland. Overcrowding, menial jobs, and living 
conditions often led to unrest among the poorer citizens. Prosperous cities became tempting 
targets for rival civilizations and barbarian invaders. Cities and civilizations that developed 
better management and new solutions to these problems grew and prospered. Those that 
failed have left their ruins around the world as warnings. 

In Civilization, as in history, a key step and a fundamental concept is the founding and 
management of cities. The civilization that you are to rule begins as a prehistoric wandering 
tribe that has just reached that critical point where it is capable of building cities. The first step 
is to build one city and from there expand. As your civilization grows, cities will spread over 
an entire continent, or part of a continent, or over several islands and continents. 

Each city acts as a giant processing plant for the food, resources, and trade of the adjacent 
lands. The people of a city go out and work the nearby farmland, mines, and forests, and the 
city converts the result of their labor into more people, armies, cash, luxury goods, temples, 
universities, etc. Raw materials are transformed by cities into the power and the ideas your 
civilization needs to prosper. 

Food that is collected feeds the local population. When there is a food surplus the 
population grows. Your first city has a small population that can only work part of the lands 
the city controls. As the city population grows, more lands can be worked, increasing 
production. Before long you can afford to send off settlers from the first city to build another 
nearby, and then another. 


Astronomy 
(Mysticism & Mathematics) 


Copernicus's 
Observatory 





Atomic Theory 
(Theory of Gravity& Physics) 





Resources are the lumber, metals, energy sources, and other raw materials that are used 
in industry. Through the craftsmen and shops of the city these resources are made into items 
useful at home or elsewhere in your civilization. Larger cities normally generate more 
resources and thus build things faster. Each city can build only one item at a time. This could 
be a military unit such as a Phalanx or Battleship, a city improvement such as a Temple or 
University, or perhaps a Wonder of the World. 

Trade is generated by the highways of commerce roads, rivers, and oceans. All nearby 
trade passes through the city bringing in luxury goods, cash, and new ideas. Your policies can 
adjust how trade is divided among luxury goods, cash, or research. There maybe times when 
a city requires more luxury goods to make more people happy, or times when more tax 
revenues are needed in the treasury. Higher taxes mean more revenue but may result in more 
people becoming unhappy. 

As your cities grow they may require more care in keeping them productive. Large Cities 
are desirable for production, but have inherent problems. A critical one you must deal with 
is the happiness of the population. The people can range from happy, to content, to unhappy. 
Having too many unhappy people may lead to revolt. 

Luxury goods make people happy but may mean fewer tax revenues or a reduced flow 
of technology. By adjusting the flow of luxuries, changing types of government, building city 
improvements, instituting martial law, and other means, it is possible to keep even the largest 
city content and productive. 

Technology is a second concept fundamental to Civilization. To make the transition from 
wandering hunter-gatherers to city dwellers, humankind had to possess some essential 
knowledge and skills. To advance beyond the first stages of city dwelling requires a 
corresponding advance in knowledge. 

At the start of Civilization, with your tribe poised on the threshold of history, they already 
possess some basic knowledge. The people understand agriculture, irrigation, construction 
of roads, and the construction of homes and other buildings. But this isn’t enough knowledge 
to survive through the coming ages. Learning new technologies opens the door to new 
abilities. A small island-bound civilization that learns Map Making can now build ships and 
expand overseas. 

The time it takes to acquire new technology depends on how much of your trade is 
allotted to new ideas. You must choose between luxuries that make the people happy, cash 
for the treasury, and technology research. The more trade allocated to this research, the faster 
the next step is acquired. When enough research has been done, your civilization acquires the 
new technology and can begin working on something new. 

The world where your civilization exists is mostly unknown to you, a mystery except in 
the immediate vicinity. To find out more about it you must explore. Not only is the world 
hidden, but also unknown are the locations of other civilizations. 


Automobile 
(Combustion & Steel) 





Armor Unit 








Other civilizations, especially those nearby, complicate your tasks as ruler. Each is ruled 
by one of your peers, and they are competing for the same resources and opportunities as you. 
They also are looking to expand and grow; at your expense if given the chance. Once contact 
is made, you can no longer concentrate solely on the growth and expansion of your 
civilization. Now you must assess the strength of rivals, adequately provide for the defense 
of your cities in case of war, or consider making war yourself. 

Successful wars can be very useful. Capturing cities is much easier than building them 
up from nothing, and may provide loot in stolen technology and cash. Weakening rivals 
reduces the threat they pose. However, long, costly wars may allow unengaged rivals to 
expand and grow in strength while you spend resources on arms. 

To explore the unknown and contend with your rivals for the world, you can build 
armies, navies, and other special units in your cities. Once an army or naval unit has been built, 
it is available for movement and combat. These units extend the power of your civilization 
around the world. When they enter hidden areas of the world, the shroud of mystery is 
removed and that area becomes known. In this way you uncover the world, finding suitable 
areas for new cities and eventually making contact with other civilizations. 

Three special units are available that can be useful to you as ruler. Settlers are groups of 
your citizens that are your pioneers. They may found new cities and also build terrain 
improvements such as roads, irrigation, and mines that increase the productivity of your 
cities. Diplomats are your emissaries and spies. They can establish embassies with rivals and 
also perform a number of cloak and dagger tasks. Caravans are bands of merchants that 
transport the produce of your cities around the world to other cities, bringing in cash and 
establishing trade routes. Trade routes increase the trade of the home city, resulting in more 
cash, luxuries, and technology. 

Wonders of the World are unique city improvements, usually structures, that can only 
be built once in the entire world. Once a particular Wonder is built by a city, no other city can 
build one. Each Wonder brings glory to the civilization owning it, and some unique tangible 
benefit as well. For example, if one of your cities builds the Oracle, then all of the Temples 
throughout your civilization become twice as effective in making the people content. 

The fundamental concepts for a successful civilization are the expansion and growth of 
your cities, and acquiring new technology. In a word, you must grow. In this dynamic world 
environment, surrounded by rivals in unknown corners, there is no future in complacency 
and stagnation. You must press forward on all three fronts: spread your cities out to claim a 
significant share of the world, increase the size and production of each city, and strive to 
acquire the latest technology. 

Your civilization cannot afford to lag too far behind your rivals in any one of these three 
spheres. A sufficient number of powerful cities can maintain the quantity of your military in 
any arms race. Keeping abreast of technology assures the quality. 


12 


Banking 
(Trade & The Republic) 





The Hittites of antiquity had a brief moment of glory because the technology of their 
weapons was superior to that of their neighbors. But those neighbors had much larger 
populations, and when they acquired the same new technology, the Hittites were ushered off 
the world’s stage. 

Cortez landed at the Aztec city of Vera Cruz with only a few hundred conquistadors, but 
with the aid of superior weapons and diplomacy, he soon had Montezuma crying in his 
chocolate. The Aztecs were deposed before they could learn the technology of the Spanish. 

Do what you canto keep your civilization growing in every area. More and larger cities, 
better technology, and better armies mean survival. Each city must be planned, managed, and 
protected so that it contributes to the power and glory of your civilization. 

By maintaining this pattern of growth over the years, you have the best chance of 
avoiding the fate of the Hittites and Montezuma. 


Sorting the Materials 





BEFORE YOU START 


This manual provides detailed instructions on how to play and gives information on the 
background of the topic. It applies to all computer systems, but specific references are given 
for use with an IBM system, for which the game was first designed. Interface controls generally 
assume that the IBM user has a mouse. A keyboard-only IBM interface is discussed in the IBM 
Technical Supplement. 
The Technical Supplement gives specific instructions for loading and/or installing the 
game for your computer. It also provides a reference of keys used in the game specific for each 
computer system. 


The Technical Supplement has complete information about how to install Civilization on 


Installation either floppy or hard disks. 


Learning the Game 


Bridge Building 
(Construction & 
Iron Working) 





Study Method: You can study the actual controls and instructions in this manual (pages 
7-88) and in the Technical Supplement. Now begin play and refer back to the instructions as 
needed. 

Jump Right In Method: This is the most popular with experienced computer game 
players. We recommend you at least read through Chapter One Introduction, especially 
the sections Cities and Civilizations, Interface Introduction, and Ending the Game and 
Winning, but even this is not necessary. Refer to the manual’s instructions for help with 
problems that arise. 


13 


14 


Bronze Working 


4g] Phalanx Unit 





INTERFACE INTRODUCTION 


Because Civilization was developed on an IBM system, the following discussion of the 
interface pertains to that version. Refer to the Technical Supplement in other versions for a 
description of the interface specific for those computer systems. 

The interface of Civilization is designed to take advantage of the mouse. It maybe played 
with a keyboard-only interface, but play is faster if you have a mouse available. (The IBM 
keyboard-only interface is discussed in the Technical Supplement.) 

The interface operates mainly through two main game displays, the map display and the 
city display. Each of these displays is described in detail in its own manual section. Across the 
top of the map display is a menu bar. From the menus available here you can reach additional 
game functions and information not available from the displays. 

The interface relies heavily on menus that are all used in a similar manner. Labeled 
buttons are also used in several places to perform a game function or reach further inforrnation. 

Using the Mouse: To click the mouse on some part of the game, move the torch that is 
the pointer onto the desired location and click the correct mouse button. 

The IBM mouse has two buttons and the interface makes a distinction between them. 
The left mouse button (LMB) is used to perform actions such as scrolling the map or 
activating a unit. 

Opening Menus: Throughout the manual you are instructed to pull down menus to 
open them up and reveal the options they contain. To open a menu using the mouse, place the 
mouse pointer on the name of the menu in the menu bar and press the LMB. If you click the 
button the menu opens and stays open. Alternatively, you can press and hold the button, and 
then drag the pointer down the list of menu options. 

When playing with the keyboard-only interface a shortcut key can be used to open the 
menus of the menu bar. For a list of these shortcut keys, seethe Technical Supplement. 

Menu Choices: To chooses menu option, place the mouse pointer on your selection and 
click the LMB. 

Alternatively, if you pull down a menu, the options are highlighted as you pass 
over them. When the option you wish is highlighted, let the mouse button go to make 
your selection. 

From the keyboard, you can make menu selections by using the keypad 8 and 2 keys to 
move the highlight bar up and down the menu until the choice you want is highlighted. Then 
press the Return key to make your choice. 

Pressing Buttons: To press any labeled button, click on it with the LMB. 

Shortcut Keys: Even when using the mouse, there are places when one keystroke can 
save several steps. Included in the interface are several of these shortcuts, described in the 
Technical Supplement. 


Map Interface 


City Display Interface 


Ceremonial Burial 





The map interface is explained in detail in the manual section, The Map Display, page 28. 
However, few important commands are included hereto help get started. 

Map Scrolling: Click the LMB on any unoccupied map square to center it in the display. 
Click the LMB on any part of the world map in the world window to center the map display 
on that part of the world. 

Current Unit: The unit on the map that is blinking is the current unit that is waiting for 
you to give it orders. It can be moved by using the keypad number keys corresponding the 
map direction you wish it to move. 


The city display interface is explained in detail in the manual section, The City Display, 

page 68. A few important commands are included below. 

Opening/Closing City Display: Click the LMB on a city on the map to open its city 
display. Press the exit button to close the display and return to the map. 

Production: Press the Change button above the production box to open a menu of items 
that can be built. 


15 





16 


Game/World Options 


Setting the Stage 


Difficulty Levels 


PRE-GAME OPTIONS 


The beginning of Civilization requires you to make a number of choices regarding the 
parameters and world of the game you wish to play. To start, follow the instructions in the 
Technical Supplement for booting the game. After the title and credits appear, you proceed 
to the selection of the following pre-game options. 


The first menu that appears asks you to choose which game to load: 

Start a New Game: If this option is chosen, a new game is begun on a newly generated 
world. This world resembles the Earth in land mass, climate, and rainfall. The new game 
begins in 4000 BC. 

Load a Saved Game: Choose this option to load a previously saved game. As prompted, 
enter the letter of the drive where your saved games are located and press the Return key (for 
the IBM), When the list of saved games appears, select the game you wish to load. (For the IBM, 
use the keypad keys/Return key.) 

EARTH: Choose this option to play on Earth. Your rivals are tribes placed in their 
historical locations. 

Customize World: Choose this option to adjust your game world as you wish. From the 
menus that appear, choose an amount of land mass, average temperatures, amount of 
moisture, and starting date. The middle option of each menu is the default Earth-like world. 

View Hall of Fame: Choose this option to open the Hall of Fame. For a description of the 
Hall of Fame, see page 23. After viewing the Hall of Fame you return to the Game/World 
Option menu. 


When starting a new game, regardless of where, a presentation of the planet's history 
precedes the game start and is shown while the world is generated. You can clear the screen 
to skip this story (press the Return key or Spacebar on the IBM), but it may take some time 
anyway to generate the new world. 


Choose the level of difficulty at which you wish to play. A number of factors are adjusted 
at each level, including the time it takes to produce new units and the pace of technological 
advance. 

Chieftain: This is the easiest level and is recommended for first-time players. The 
program provides advice when the player must make decisions. 

Warlord: Your rivals are somewhat tougher and technology takes Ionger to acquire. This 
is for the occasional player who doesn’t want too difficult a test. 

Prince: Your rivals are substantially tougher and technology comes much slower. You 
will need some experience and skill to win at this level. 


Level of Competition 


Pick Your Tribe 


Your Name 


Chemistry 
(University & Medicine) 


oe, 





King: Your rivals are most evenly matched with you in capability. Experienced and 
skilled players will play most of their games at this level as it is a strong challenge with victory 
far from foregone. 

Emperor: This the most difficult level and only for those who feel the need to be humbled. 
This level can be won, but not consistently. 


Choose between 3 and 7 civilizations in the world. More opponents is not necessarily 
more dangerous. The fewer your opponents, the more time you have to peaceably expand and 
develop before encountering rivals. More opponents means earlier contact and the risk of war. 
But contact with other civilizations offers the opportunities of trade, alliances, and the spoils 
of war. 


Select your tribe from the menu of options. Where your first unit is placed on the map and 
the proximity of rivals is determined randomly except on Earth. In this case, the civilizations 
are chosen somewhat randomly but the ones chosen do start near their historic locale. 


Type in a suitably impressive name for yourself that contains no more than 14 letters. 
Enter the name into the game when you have finished typing it. (Press the Return key on 
the IBM.) The program will a suggest a name that you can accept if you can’t think of 
something better. 





18 


Date 


Disasters 


City Check 


THE GAME TURN 


Civilization is played in a series of turns, each following a sequence of play options. As 
each turn proceeds through the sequence, you direct the activities of your civilization, 
including the management of your cities, the production of new units, the building of 
city improvements, the movements and battles of your armies, and negotiations with 
other civilizations. 

Each turn proceeds through the following sequence of play. 


A new turn begins with the advancing of the date. Depending on the current year, the 
date advances from twenty years to one year. The current date is found in the date window 


of the map display. 


At the beginning of a new turn there is a possibility of a natural disaster striking a city in 

the world. Any disaster that occurs is reported and takes effect immediately. Disasters can 

result in loss of population or the destruction of a city improvement. Most disasters can be 

prevented by a specific city improvement or technology. If the target city is prepared for the 
disaster, then the disaster does not occur. (See Disasters, page 88). 


Each city in your civilization is checked individually for production, growth, unrest, 

maintenance, and scientific research. These concepts are explained in detail in the manual 
chapter Cities, page 61. All steps are carried out for one city before the next is checked. 

Production: If the city produces sufficient surplus resources to complete the item the city 
is producing, that item is added to the city. 

If your city does not produce sufficient resources to support all of the existing units for 
which it is the home city, units are destroyed until enough support is available. Units farthest 
away from the city are destroyed first. 

Growth: If the city produces sufficient surplus food, it grows by one population point. 
This added population is put to work on the city map. 

Disorder: If the number of unhappy citizens exceeds the number of happy citizens due 
to population growth or the destruction of a city improvement by disaster, your city goes into 
civil disorder (see page 66). You receive a message reporting this condition. 

If this is the first turn of disorder, you jump to the affected city’s display so that 
adjustments can be made to return the city to order. If the situation is not corrected, in 
following turns you are notified that disorder continues. 


Movement And 
Combat 


Chivalry 
(Horseback Riding & 
Feudalism) 


Knights Unit 





Maintenance: Taxes collected from the city are added to your treasury and then the 
maintenance costs for improvements in this city are deducted. If you don’t have sufficient 
funds in your treasury to pay the maintenance costs, one improvement in this city, chosen by 
local leaders, is sold. 

Note that while your civilization as a whole may have a revenue surplus for the turn, you 
can still lose an improvement when your treasury is low. High maintenance costs for the 
first cities checked may deplete the treasury and forces sale before later cities contribute their 
cash surpluses. 

Scientific Research: The research contributed by this city, measured by the number of 
light bulbs it produces, is added to the total so far accumulated by your civilization. If this total 
is sufficient to acquire the technology that you have instructed your scientists to study, then 
you receive a message informing you that you have obtained this new technology. 


After each city has been checked, you have the opportunity to move your active units. 

While a unit is moving it may engage in combat. 

Each active unit is designated for movement, one after another. Each unit has the option 

of moving, not moving, or delaying its move until later in the turn. For more detailed 
information on moving your units, see Movement, page 33. 

Combat occurs when a unit attempts to enter a map square occupied by a unit or city of 
another civilization (see Combat, page 35). (Exceptions see Diplomats, page 37, and Cara- 
vans, page 39.) Normally, either the attacking unit or all defending units are destroyed when 
the combat is resolved. A victorious unit with movement points remaining may continue 
moving and even attack again. 

During this movement phase you may pause to perform all other management tasks for 
your civilization. You may wish to consult with your advisors concerning the state of your 
civilization’s trade, or science, or check the attitude of your population. You can examine any 
or all of your cities to adjust their work force placements or production. This is the time to 
change tax rates, governments, or examine the state of international affairs. 

When all active units have been moved, your game turn is over and the next 
civilization moves. 





19 


20 


End of Turn 


Adulation 


Code of Laws 
(Alphabet) 





Once all active units have been moved, your game turn may end. At this point a blinking 
“End of Turn” message appears in the unit identification window. So long as this message 
remains visible you may still examine cities, consult advisors, etc. To end your turn, follow the 
prompt to continue the game. (On the IBM, press the Return key.) Once you choose to 
continue, you cannot examine cities, etc., until the next turn. 

The End of Turn message may be toggled on or off from the Game menu. Open this menu 
and choose “Options.” One of the options on this menu is “End of Turn.” There is check mark 
next to the option indicating that it is on and is to appear at the end of each turn. To turn off 
the message, choose the “End of Turn” option and the check mark disappears. 

Even when the End of Turn message is tumed off, it still appears during any turn in which 
you have no active units. 

When the End of Turn message isoff, you receive no warning that the turn is about to end. 
At the moment you move your last unit, your turn is over and the next civilization begins 
to move. 


After all of the civilizations have taken their turns, there is a brief pause while the record 
keeper sand historians exarnine your accomplishrnents to date. The people of your civilization 
may reward the outstanding success of your policies by expanding and improving your 
palace. In addition, independent historians and chroniclers may report on where you or your 
civilization stands compared to your rivals. 

Palace: As your population grows, the people spontaneously expand and improve your 
palace to reflect the glory that your rulership has achieved. When the total population of your 
civilization reaches certain milestones, you may increase the size or improve the quality of 
your palace. 

Clear the screen (press Return, the Spacebar, or either mouse button for the IBM) after the 
people offer to improve your palace. When a picture of the current palace appears, select 
whether you want an existing part improved or a new part added. Click on a button 
below a part of the palace to improve it, or click on a button just off the edge of the palace to 
add to it. 

From the available parts then displayed, select the one you wish to have built. Palaces Can 
be built in three styles classical, medieval, or Middle Eastern. A miniature rendition of your 
palace is shown in the palace window of the map display. 

Historians: There are four historians who occasionally report on the progress of the 
civilizations in your world. These reports are an opportunity for you to judge how you are 
doing. The historians are Herodotus, Pliny, Gibbon, and Toynbee. 





Combustion 
(Refining & Explosives) 





Cruiser Unit 











Civilizations maybe judged in any one of five categories, listed below. The published list 
includes only the known civilizations, those with whom you have established an embassy. 
(Embassies are established by Diplomats, seepage 37.) However, all civilizations, known and 
unknown, are considered in rankings. For example, if your civilization has the third highest 
population but the larger civilizations are not known, you would appear at the top of the list, 
but shown as number three in the world. 

The five categories and how they are ranked follow. 

Advancement: The number of technology advancements each civilization has acquired. 

Happiness: The number of happy people in each civilization’s cities. 

Power: The total of the attack and defense factors of each civilization’s military units. 

Size: The population of each civilization. 

Wealth: The size of each civilization’s treasury. 





22 


Ending Play 


Communism 
(Philosophy & 
Industrialization) 





ENDING THE GAME AND WINNING 


Civilization may be ended in five ways. You may quit at any time, retire at any time, be 
destroyed by a rival, continue on until the game and the history of your civilization both 
automatically end, or conquer the world by eliminating all other civilizations. If you retire or 
let the game run its course the performance of your civilization is judged and compared 
against your peers. If you have been a good manager and leader, your name maybe added 
to the Civilization Hall of Fame. 

Although the game ends for scoring purposes after you win, you may continue playing 
if you choose. After winning, you are offered the opportunity to keep playing if you wish to 
see what more you can accomplish. No additional score is kept for this extra play. 


Quitting: You may quit during your civilization’s turn by pressing the Quit key 
(Alt + Q on the IBM). You must be at the map display and one of your units must be waiting 
for orders (blinking on the map). You may not quit when another civilization is taking its turn 
or from any other display. When you quit, you are given one chance to change your mind 
before the decision is irrevocable. You are not shown your civilization score or entered into 
the Hall of Fame. 

Retiring: To retire, open the Game menu and choose the option “Retire.” You are given 
one chance to change your mind. If you proceed to retire, you are shown your civilization score 
and entered into the Hall of Fame if you qualify. 

Destruction: If your civilization is destroyed by one of your rivals, then the game 
automatically ends. You are not given a chance to start over in this world. Since you can have 
no score, you can not qualify for the Hall of Fame. You may review a replay of the world’s 
history. If you want to play again, you must start over with a new world. 

Automatic Ending: A game of Civilization ends when a spaceship containing colonists 
from any civilization reaches the nearby Alpha Centauri star system. All play temporarily 
ceases. Your final civilization score is reported and you are entered into the Hall of Fame if you 
qualify. However, you do not necessarily have to quit playing. Although your score is not 
recorded hereafter, if you wish, you may continue playing to see what the future holds. From 
this point on you must quit to stop playing. 

Conquer the World: If you succeed in eliminating all other civilizations in the world, the 
game automatically ends. This is the ultimate achievement possible by a civilization. You are 
shown your civilization score and may be entered into the Hall of Fame. You may review a 
replay of the world’s history. 


Winning 


The Hall of Fame 


You win a game of Civilization in either of two ways by eliminating all rival civilizations 
or by surviving until the colonization of space begins. 

The elimination of all other civilizations in the world is very hard to accomplish. You are 
much more likely to win by being in existence when colonists reach Alpha Centauri. Even if 
the colonists are not yours, the successful direction of your civilization through the centuries 
is an achievement. You have survived countless wars, the pollution of the industrial age, and 
the risks of nuclear weapons. 

When the game is won by either method, your skill as ruler is measured by a final 
civilization score. 

Civilization Score: This is the sum of the following factors, plus any bonus for space 
colonists or conquering the world. 

2 points: each happy citizen 

1 point: each content citizen 

20 points: each Wonder of the World 

3 points: each turn of peace (no war anywhere) 

10 points: each futuristic advance your civilization acquires (seepage 48) 
(-) 10 points: each map square currently polluted 

Space Colonists Bonus: In addition to the above points, if your spaceship is the first to 
reach Alpha Centauri you can receive a bonus score. This is 50 points per 10,000 colonists sent, 
multiplied by the success percentage of your mission. For example, if your spaceship arrives 
first with 10,000 colonists and the success percentage of your expedition was 80%, then you 
receive 40 bonus points. 

Conquering the World Bonus: If you succeed in conquering the world, you receive up 
to 1000 civilization points, plus a bonus for the date. The faster you conquer the world, the 
higher the bonus. 


The Hall of Fame records the best five civilizations that you have built, listed in order of 
their civilization ranking. This ranking is determined from the basic civilization score 
multiplied by a difficulty factor and a competition factor. The higher the civilization ranking, 
the higher the position in the Hall of Fame. 

You can examine the Hall of Fame when starting a new game from the pre-game options 
menu. When you retire or reach the automatic end of a game, you go to the Hall of Fame, even 
if you don’t qualify to enter. 

While at the Hall of Fame you may clear all of the current entries if you wish. (On the IBM, 
click the LMB on the Clear button.) 


23 





24 


2. THE WORLD 





THE WORLD MAP 


The world surrounding your civilization is an entire planet consisting of several 
continents, islands, and ocean. A totally new planet can be generated each game or your 
civilization can attempt to prosper on the historical Earth itself. All planets are bordered by 
impenetrable polar caps to the north and south, but are not bounded east and west. Moving 
off the east edge brings you back onto the west edge. 

As mentioned in the section on Pre-Game Options, new worlds are Earth-like in terms 
of temperature, moisture, and land mass. These factors can be adjusted if you wish to 
experiment with different combinations. 

You begin with almost no knowledge of the world. The wandering tribe that is the 
ancestor of your civilization (represented by one or more Settler units) has explored only that 
part of the world that it occupies or can see nearby. The rest of the world and the other 
civilizations putting down their roots are hidden, over the mountains, through the forests, and 
across the seas. As your units move and explore, they discover more of the worlds geography, 
important resource sites, other minor tribes, and, eventually, the evidence of rival civilizations. 


The world is divided into small independent pe known as squares. Each square 
World Geography consists of a unique type of terrain. Each type of terrain has its own economic usefulness, effect 
on movement, and effect on combat. Detailed information about the terrain types is also 
available from the Terrain Chart in the Technical Supplement or in the Civilopedia. 
The economic usefulness of the various terrains is important when selecting city sites. 
The terrain that is close to a city produces the food, resources, and trade the city needs to grow 
and be productive. Some terrain types are more valuable than others. Some maybe irrigated 
or mined for increased economic value, and others maybe converted into another type of 
terrain (see Settlers, page 37). 
When selecting sites for new cities, consider the terrain types that are within the radius 
of the prospective city (see The City Radius, page 62). The best city sites offer immediate food, 
resource, and trade production, plus the potential for long term development. 


25 


26 


Computers 
(Mathematics & Electronics) 





A brief description of the terrain types follows. 

Arctic: Frozen glaciers of ice and snow found near the north and south poles. No food, 
resources, or trade can be obtained here. 

Desert: Very dry region that can be developed to be marginally productive. There are 
some resources present that can be mined, food can be produced if the desert is irrigated, and 
roads generate some trade. 

Grassland: These open lands have especially thick topsoils making them excellent food 
producing areas. Food production can be increased by irrigation. Roughly half of the 
Grasslands also have some resources, making them excellent city sites. Grasslands may be 
converted into Forests for increased resource production. 

Hills: An area of rolling hills that offers easy access to minerals, sources of water, 
pastures, and some possibility for agriculture. When mined, Hills produce excellent re- 
sources. They also produce some food and can be irrigated if necessary. Irrigating Hills allows 
the irrigation to pass on to further squares that may be otherwise cut off from water. 

Jungle: These areas of rain forest and dense jungle produce relatively poor amounts of 
food and no resources. However, they can be made much more valuable by conversion into 
either Grasslands or Forest. For this reason, the long-term potential of a city site containing 
several Jungles is good. 

Mountains: ‘This very rugged terrain can only produce a small amount of resources but 
this can be increased by mining. Mountains make the best defensive terrain, but the 
production is so low that they make a poor economic choice for the site of a city. 

Ocean: Oceans produce small amounts of food, but a substantial trade. Only ships or 
aircraft can enter Oceans. Landlocked Oceans are really lakes but are treated like other Oceans 
in all respects. 

Plains: T’hese open areas differ from Grasslands in having Poorer soil but better resources 
of timber and minerals. They are poor food producers unless irrigated. Due to the presence 
of resources, they make good choices for city sites. Plains maybe converted into Forests. 

Rivers: Rivers are great sites for starting cities and civilizations due to the richness of 
riverbank soils and natural trade routes for boats. Rivers are as good as Grasslands for 
producing food and always generate trade. River terrain may be irrigated to increase food 
production. It was no accident that the first civilizations sprang up along rivers. 

Swamp: These coastal wetlands and flooded interior lands produce only a small quantity 
of food. Like Jungles, however, they can be converted into Grasslands or Forest. 

Tundra: These sparse lands of permafrost produce only a small amount of food from 
grazing animals. There is no agriculture or use for irrigation. These areas cannot be converted 
to other terrain and make very poor city sites. 

Forest: These woodlands produce a modest mixture of food and resources. If more food 
production is needed in the area, they can be converted into Plains. 


Special Resources 


Minor Tribes 


Minor Tribe Icon 





Special resources can occur in many terrains and add significantly to their economic 
value. The location of these resources is marked by distinct symbols that are uncovered as the 
map is explored. More detailed information about special resources can be found on the 
Terrain Chart in the Technical Supplement or under the entry for their base terrain in the 
Civilopedia. A brief description of the special resources follows. 

Coal (Hills): Coal deposits represent rich locations of coal or metal ores. These areas 
produce greatly increased resources, especially when mined. 

Fish (Ocean): Fish represent the location of underwater banks and reefs where currents 
and nutrients create excellent fishing grounds. Fishing banks produce increased amounts 
of food. 

Game: (Forest and Tundra): The presence of game indicates excellent food sources 
available or the potential for good grazing. Game areas produce additional food, but cannot 
be improved. 

Gems (Jungle): Gems indicate the presence of precious stones, ivory, spices, salt, or other 
valuable commodities. These are good trade items and therefore generate substantial trade 
from the area. 

Gold (Mountain): Gold represents a bonanza of gold or silver. The value of these 
deposits produces tremendous trade. 

Horses (Plains): Horses represent an increase in resources from this area due to the 
benefits of using domesticated animals such as the horse or oxen to do work. For all but the 
most recent periods of history, animals were an important source of lifting and pulling power. 

Oasis (Desert): The oasis is a very fertile island in the desert that takes advantage of the 
presence of some water and rich local nutrients. The result is an area that produces substantial 
quantities of food. 

Oil (Swamp): Oil represents the presence of mineral wealth, especially petroleum. The 
result is a substantial quantity of resources. Oil resources cannot be improved by mining. 

Note: If you convert terrain containing a special resource into another terrain type, the 
original special resource is lost. In some cases a special resource that can be found in the new 
terrain may appear. 


During exploration, minor tribes may also be discovered in the world. These are small 
tribes that have not yet advanced to be civilizations. If you enter a minor tribe’s village by 
moving onto it, a number of things may happen. You may discover valuable metals, the tribe 
may become a mercenary unit in your army, you may discover a scroll of ancient wisdom that 
advances your civilization, your magnificence may inspire them to become civilized and 
found a new city in your empire, or they may prove to be extremely violent barbarians. 


27 


28 


Map Window 


The Map Display 


World Window 


Palace 
Window ~ 


Status 
Window 


THE MAP DISPLAY 


This is the display most commonly used during play. From here you control the 
movement and combat of units throughout the world, monitor the moves and development 
of other civilizations, and summon the reports of advisors. From the map display you can 
examine the known geography of any part of your empire or those of your rivals. The map 
display consists of six parts: the map window, the world window, the menu bar, the palace 
window, the status report, and the unit identification window. 


The Jarge map window in the display shows one part of the world map in detail. Here 
you can examine the terrain, control the movements of units, scout sites for new cities, and 
prepare war plans. 

When your civilization is just getting started, most of the world is unknown. The map is 
covered and hidden from view. As your units move and explore, the hidden areas are 
discovered and the map fills in. It is useful to uncover the world quickly to find good areas for 
expansion, absorb any minor tribes nearby, locate opposing civilizations, and determine 
likely avenues of approach by enemies. ” 

There are a number ways to quickly 
change maps and otherwise look at different 
parts of the world. These are described be- 
low. (Interface controls are explained for us- 
ing a mouse with an IBM system.) 

Change Maps: You can quickly scroll 
around the world changing the map visible in 
the map display. (On the IBM, click the LMB 
on any visible map square and the map scrolls, 
centering on the square you selected.) Seethe 
section World Window below for another 
way to quickly change maps. 

Center on Unit: You can center the map 
on the unit now waiting for orders (blinking), 
regardless of where it is in the world. If the 
waiting unit is not visible, the map scrolls so 
that the unit appears centered. Press the Cen- 
ter key. (On the IBM, press the C key.) 


Menu Bar 


Unit Identification Window 





World Wndow 


Menu Bar 


Find City: You can center the map on any known city in the world. Pull down the Game 
menu from the menu bar and choose the option “Find City.” Type in the name of the city and 
press Return (on the IBM). The map scrolls and centers on the city. If you have not yet 
discovered the location of a city, nothing happens if you try to find it using this method. 

Note that you need not type in the entire name of the city, just enough letters to 
distinguish it from any other city in the world. 


This window in the top left of the display shows a map of the entire world. It is centered 
on the part of the world currently shown in the map window. A box is positioned on this world 
map (colored white on the IBM) to show what part is now visible in the map window. 

In the early days of your civilization, while most of the map is still unknown, the world 
window is of little help in showing where you are located in relation to other islands and 
continents. Because this window centers on the map display, if most of the world is hidden 
you cannot know where the polar caps are or even what hemisphere you occupy. You may 
be quite near one of the polar caps but not know it. After some exploration, you can better judge 
your location and that of your rivals. 

Map Scrolling: You can use the world window to speed the scrolling of the map display. 
(On the IBM, place the mouse pointer in the world window on the part of the world that you 
wish to center in the map window and click the LMB. The world window shifts and the map 
window scrolls to center on the position you pointed to.) 


The menu bar is found across the top of the map display. From here orders maybe passed 
to units and various reports from advisors may be summoned. There are five menus available 
Game, Orders, Advisors, World, and Civilopedia. 

The Orders menu lists any special commands that can be given to the unit waiting for 
orders, in addition to normal movement commands. Refer to the manual section Additional 
Orders, page 36, for a description of the commands possible. 

The Advisors and World menus contain special reports that can be requested from your 
various advisors. Refer to the manual section Advisors/World Reports, page 46, for a 
description of these reports. 

The Civilopedia menu gives access to the on-line encyclopedia of Civilization. Use this to 
quickly obtain information on many different topics such as technology advances, military 
units, terrain, etc. See the manual section Civilopedia, page 51, for a description of the 
information available. 


29 


30 


Palace Window 


The options available from the Game menu are the following. 

Revolution!:In order to change your civilization’s type of government, you must have 
a revolution. The government goes into Anarchy for a period of turns and a new type of 
government may be chosen. You must have acquired specific technologies to choose a type 
of government other than Despotism. For a detailed explanation of this option, see the manual 
section Governments, page 43. 

Tax Rate: The trade that cities generate arrives as luxury goods, tax revenue, and new 
ideas (technology research). Here you can change the percentage that becomes tax revenue. 
See Trade Rates below for more information. 

Luxury Rate: Change the percentage of trade brought in as luxury goods. See Trade Rates 
below for more information. 

Find City Choose this option to locate a city in the world. Type in the name of the city 
you wish to find. The map window centers on the city. 

Options: Choose this menu option to turn on or off some game features. Features 
available are Instant Advice, Autosave, End of Turn, and Animations. A check mark next to 
the feature indicates that it is on. Choosing an option that is on turns it off and vice versa. 

Instant Advice provides some helpful hints for new players. The Autosave feature 
automatically saves your game every 50 turns. When End of Turn is on, a message reports the 
end of each turn and must be cleared for the game to continue. If you have no active units, this 
message appears whether toggled on or off. Animations maybe on or off. 

Save Game: Choosing this option stops play to save your game. (On the IBM, follow the 
prompts for entering the drive where you wish the game to be saved.) 

Retire: Ends the history of the civilization you now rule, calculating your score. If the 
score is high enough, you may enter the Hall of Fame. Note that your civilization is lost if not 
saved first. 

Quit: Ends the history of the civilization you rule. No score is calculated and your 
civilization is lost if not saved first. 


This window presents a miniature rendition of your palace. Its breadth and grandeur is 
a depiction of how well your civilization is progressing. If your civilization prospers and 
grows, the people recognize the glory of your rulership by periodically improving and 
expanding your palace. The relative magnificence or shoddiness of your palace is displayed 
for you, your advisors, and international emissaries to see. 

For more information on the palace, see the section Palace, page 20. 


The entries and symbols here report the current date and several facts concerning the 


The Status Report Status of your civilization. 


The Status Report 





Date: The date is reported in years plus the notation BC or AD. The normal game begins 
in 4000 BC. Each turn represents the passing of so many years, depending on the current date. 

Treasury: The amount of cash in your treasury. 

Population: The size of your civilization’s population. 

Trade Rates: The three numbers separated by periods are your trade rates. The first 
number is the percentage of your trade that provides luxuries. The second rate is the 
percentage that becomes tax revenue added to the treasury. The third rate is the percentage 
put towards new ideas to help learn new technology. 

Luxury goods are the cultural pleasures like music, art, sports, and the theater that people 
come to enjoy when they have leisure time. The more luxuries that can be provided, the more 
happy citizens in your cities. 

Tax revenue goes into the treasury and is needed to maintain existing city improvements. 
Excess taxes over maintenance needs accumulate in the treasury and can be spent later. Taxes, 
especially high ones, tend to make the people unhappy. 

The more new ideas and scientific research accomplished, the faster new technology 
is acquired. 

Each of the three by-products of trade has its benefits. As time passes and cities grow, you 
may have to adjust the trade rates often to provide a minimum amount of taxes and science 
research while keeping the population content as a whole. To 
adjust trade rates, pull down the Game menu and choose 
either the Tax Rate or Luxury Rate option. By setting these 


pian : two rates, the science rate is set by default. 
New Ideas: This scientific research indicator, shaped 
Environment like a light bulb, shows how near you are to making a 
Indicator civilization advance. The nearer you get, the more the light 
; bulb fills in (yellow on the IBM). When the bulb is full (bright 
ass yellow), it is on, indicating that you have acquired a new 


technology. Once the new idea is reported and your scientists 
are sent off to study something else, the light bulb is turned 
off. As your scientists progress, it gradually turns on again. 
For more information on civilization advances, see Science 
Advisor, page 48. 


31 


The Unit 
Identification 
Window 


The Unit Identification Window 


Nationality _ 
Unit Type __ 
Veteran Status — 
Movement Remaining 


Home City ~~ 
Terrain Occupied — 





32 


Environment: The environment indicators the sun, and its color shows how great is the 
risk of global warming. When there is no risk of global warming, the sun indicator is not 
present. With the first case of pollution, the sun indicator appears (colored dark red on the 
IBM). If pollution continues, the color gradually changes (on the IBM to light red, yellow, and 
then white). If pollution is not brought under control when the indicator is brightest (white 
on the IBM), the planet suffers a bout of global warming and then the indicator reverts to a 
cooler color reflecting the new equilibrium. 

Pollution and environmental problems can also be caused by nuclear reactor meltdowns 
and fallout from nuclear weapons. For more information on pollution and global warming, 
see the manual section Planetary Caretaking, page 52. 


The information reported here refers to the unit currently waiting for orders. This is the 
unit blinking. If the unit is not visible, press the Center key to center the map so that it is. (On 

the IBM press the C key.) 

The following information is shown. 

Nationality: The name of your civilization, the one to which the unit belongs. 

Unit Type: The type of unit and whether it is a veteran or not. 

Movement: The number of movement points the unit has remaining to use. If you are 
finished moving a unit that has movement left, press the Passkey (the Spacebar on the IBM) 
to skip to the next unit. 

Note that points are shown in thirds after the decimal point when moving along Roads 
because Roads triple movement. For example, a unit that begins with 1 movement point and 
moves one square along a Road would be shown with .2 movement points remaining. 

Also, units beginning on a square containing a Railroad 
and moving along the Railroad spend no movement points. 

Home City:The name of the city that is supporting the 
unit and normally the city where it was built. You may 
transfer a unit to another city by moving it there and pressing 
the Home City key (the H key on the IBM). This may be useful 
when one of your cities is threatened with capture because all 
units supported by a captured city are destroyed. 

Terrain: The terrain type of the square the unit is cur- 
rently in. This terrain report disregards the presence of a city 

but does mention other improvements such as irrigation, 
roads, railroads, etc. 

Other Units: At the bottom of this window are shown 
any friendly units that also occupy this square. Units within 
a heavy black border are fortified. Units that are faded out are 
on sentry duty. 


SETTLERS, SOLDIERS, AND ENVOYS 


As ruler of your civilization you decide what military units to build, whereto deploy 
them, and when to fight. In addition you control parties of Settlers looking to found new cities, 
Diplomats, and Caravans seeking to establish trade routes. 

Through the years a majority of your time is spent moving and positioning armies. A 
strong military is required first for defense against rivals and barbarians. They are also the eyes 
of your civilization, exploring the world as they move. They can also serve you by defeating 
the armies of your rivals and conquering their cities. 

Armies can be ground military units (Legions, Cannons, and Armor for example), naval 
units (Triremes, Ironclads, Battleships, etc.), or air units (Fighters and Bombers). Also 
available are four special units: Settlers, Diplomats, Caravans, and Nuclear units. All unit 
types available are described in the Civilopedia section Military Units. 

After founding your first city, you may have the technology to build only two types of 
unit, Militia and Settlers. As your civilization acquires new technology, additional unit types 
become available for building. All new units that are built appear at the city where they are 
constructed and are available to be moved from that point. 

All military units and Settlers have an attack factor (A), defense factor (D), and movement 
factor (M). The attack and defense factors indicate the army’s relative strength when attacking 
and defending. The movement factor indicates how far the unit may move. In addition to 
moving and fighting, there are additional orders that a unit maybe given. 


Each turn, you may give orders to your units, one at a time. The unit waiting for orders 
Movement _ blinks on the map. There are several order options available move the unit across the map up 
to the limit of its movement factor, skip the unit if you prefer to move it later in the turn, or have 

it do nothing this turn. 

In addition you may order most units to fortify or go on sentry duty. Fortified or sentry 
units no longer require orders. In future turns they carry on and do not blink, waiting for 
orders. If you wish to move these units later, they must be activated individually. 

Moving Units:Units may be moved up to the limit of their movement factor. The cost 
to enter a map square depends on the terrain. Roads and Railroads speed the movement of 
ground units. When an unit is unable to complete a movement order because it doesn’t have 
enough movement points to proceed, its movement is finished for the turn. The map then 
centers on the next unit waiting for orders. 

(On the IBM, units are moved across the map by using numeric keypad keys 1-9, but not 
5. Units maybe moved in any of eight directions corresponding to these eight outside keys. 
For example, pressing the 2 key moves the unit one square towards the bottom of the map.) 


33 


Skipping Units: To skip a unit temporarily, press the Wait key (the W key on the IBM). 
This passes you onto other units waiting for orders and returns you to the skipped unit after 
all others have had a chance to move. 

No Movement: To order a unit not to move, press the No Movement key (the Space Bar 
on the IBM). The map centers on the next unit needing orders. 

Activating Units:Fortified units and those on sentry duty must be activated to receive 
movement orders. (On the IBM, place the mouse pointer on the square and click the left mouse 
button. This opens a menu displaying all units in the square. Click again on the icon of any 
unit you wish to activate.) Fortified or sentry units within a 

city must be activated from the city display- see page 76. 
Sentry units are also activated when enemy units move 
adjacent to them. 

Movement Restrictions: Ground units (all non-ship, air, 
or nuclear units) normally move only on land. They may 
move over sea squares, but only by naval transport (see 
below). Ships may not enter squares entirely made up of land 
except cities that are on the coast. Air units may move over 
land and sea squares, but must land on a friendly city square 
or Aircraft Carrier unit to refuel. 

Ground units may not move from one square adjacent to an 
enemy army or city directly to another such square. The prohibited 
square may be adjacent to the first enemy army, another army 
(even one from another civilization), or any enemy city. 
Ground units may move into such a controlled square if a 
friendly unit is already there. Air units, ship units, Diplomats 
and Caravans ignore these restrictions. 

Naval Transport: Ground units may be carried over 


Movement Restrictions Diagram 





=E A = Friendly Ci sea squares only by Triremes, Sails, Frigates, or Transports. 

UO aay a pia Refer to the Civilopedia for specific information about these 

= Friendly Army X = Movesnotallowed ship units. ; j , 

= Units may load onto a ship by moving onto it from an 
= ‘ = adjacent land square. Also, units on sentry duty in a city with 

| = Bneoyy iy Y = Allowed moves a ship automatically load when the ship leaves. Units aboard 

Notes ship are on sentry duty. 


Units may unload when activated from sentry duty and 
adjacent to land. They can be activated by the normal method 
of activation or by pressing the Unload key when the trans- 


1. X moves are okay if those squares already 
contain an army from your civilization. 


2. Movement restrictions do not apply to ships, air : ON -OE'DY’ Ps 
units, diplomats, and caravans. porting ship is blinking. (On the IBM, press the U key.) 





34 


Combat occurs when a unit from one civilization attempts to enter a square occupied by 


Combat a unit of another civilization. When this happens a battle is immediately resolved, resulting 


eee | 
(The Republic & eee | 


"| Riflemen Unit 





in the destruction of one army or the other. When more than one unit is in the defender's 
square, the unit with the highest defensive strength defends. If it loses, then all other armies 
stacked with it are destroyed as well. Successful attackers that have a full movement point 
remaining after combat advance into the defender’s square. 

The important factors in combat are the attack and defense strengths of the combatants, 
the presence of veterans, the terrain occupied by the defender, and any defensive 
improvements in the square. After all of these factors are considered, the combat is resolved 
as a simple calculation. 

For example, if a Chariot (attack factor 4) attacks a Phalanx (defense factor 2), the Chariot 
has a 66% chance of winning (4 out of 6) and the Phalanx 33% (2 out of 6). If both units were 
veterans, the odds are 6 to 3. If both are veterans and the Phalanx was behind City Walls (which 
triples the defense factor), the odds are 6 to 9. 

Shore bombardments, city attacks, nuclear attacks, and bribing enemy armies (see page 
39 below) are special types of combat. 

Attack Strength: The basic attack strength of all armies. This full strength is brought to 
bear so long as the army has at least one movement factor remaining from movement. Armies 
with less movement available may still attack but are penalized. Armies with high movement 
rates may make several attacks each turn at full strength. 

Defense Strength: The basic defense strength of all armies. 

Veteran Status: Veteran armies have their attack and defense strengths increased by 50% 
before any other modification. Armies become veterans when built at cities containing the 
Barracks improvement, or they may become veterans after winning a battle. 

Terrain: Many of the world terrain types increase the strength of defenders. See the 
Terrain entries in the Civilopedia or the Terrain Chart in the Technical Supplement for details. 

Fortified Armies: Ground armies may fortify themselves, increasing their defense 
strength by 50%. An army that has any movement points remaining maybe ordered to fortify 
on any land square by pressing the Fortify key (the F key on the IBM). 

Improvements: Armies within a Fortress have their strength doubled after all other 
modifications. Armies inside a city containing City Walls are tripled in strength. Cities 
protected by City Walls do not suffer population losses. 

Attacking Cities: When a defender in a city is destroyed by ground attack, other 
defending units present are not destroyed. However, the population of the city is reduced by 
one point unless the city is protected by City Walls. Population loss does not occur due to naval 
or air attack, but is affected by nuclear attack. 


35 


36 


Additional Orders 


Construction 
(Masonry &Currency) 


Fortress (see page 37) 





Shore Bombardments: Naval units with attack factors, other than Submarines, may 
attack enemy armies on adjacent land squares, including cities. Naval units in cities may 
defend against attack. 

Nuclear Attacks: Nuclear attacks occur when a Nuclear unit attempts to enter a square 
occupied by enemy units or an enemy city. In either case, all units, regardless of civilization, 
in the target square and adjacent squares are destroyed. In addition, a city loses half of its 
population. Nuclear attack can only be stopped by the presence of an SDI Defense 
improvement in a city. 


Units may be given a number of other orders besides movement (and combat caused by 

movement). Settlers and diplomats may be given Unique orders explained later. 

Go To: Orders an army to proceed to a destination square as fast as it can. The army 
continues moving turn after turn until it arrives. Press the Go To key (the G key on the IBM), 
and then designate the destination square. (On the IBM, point to the square with the mouse 
pointer and press the LMB.) 

Home City: Orders a unit to change its home city. Move the unit to the desired new home 
and press the Home key (the H key on the IBM). Air units in flight may use this key to move 
to the nearest friendly city. Press the Home key while the air unit is in flight and it immediately 
moves to the nearest friendly city or Aircraft Carrier. If the air unit does not have enough 
movement remaining to reach the nearest base, it crashes instead. 

Sentry Duty:A unit on sentry duty is marked by a faded icon on the map. It no longer 
blinks each turn waiting for new orders. Sentry units are activated as explained above (see 
page 34). Sentry units automatically board any transporting ship that leaves. a city they 
occupy. To put an army on sentry duty, press the Sentry key (the S key on the IBM). 

Disband: This order disbands the unit receiving it, removing the unit from the map and 
city records. To disband a unit, press the Disband key (the Shift+ D keys on the IBM). 

Pillage: This order destroys any terrain improvements (irrigation or mines) present in the 
square the army occupies. Roads and railroads are unaffected. To pillage, press the Pillage key 
(the Shift + P keys on the IBM). 


Key (IBM) 
Irrigation() 
Irrigation(@ 
Fortress(F) 
Mining(M) 
Mining(M) 
Pollution(P) 


Road(R) 
Road(R) 


Settlers are groups of your most resourceful and adventurous citizens. As independent 


Settlers pioneers they perform two critical functions for your civilization they found new cities and 
serve as engineers. 

New Cities: To found a new city, move a Settler to the desired location and press the Build 
key (the B key on the IBM). The Settler disappears because the people it represents have 
become the population of the new city. However, in the future the new city can be ordered to 
produce more Settlers that can be used to found additional cities. 

The Build order can also be used to grow an existing city. Move a Settler into an existing 
city and press the Build key. The Settler is absorbed into the city, adding one point to its 
population. This may be useful when one city is limited in its ability to expand. This city can 
be used to produce Settlers who migrate to a larger more useful city where the Settlers can be 
put to work. However, Settlers may not be added to cities that already contain ten population 
points or more. 

Settler Engineers: Settlers can make a number of agricultural and industrial improve- 
ments for your civilization, acting as engineers. Place the Settler in the square where the work 
is to be done and press the correct key (see the box below). Note that your civilization must 
possess certain technologies before some improvements can be built. 

Diplomats 
Improvement ; : : 
irrigate agricultural lands Diplomats are unique units that can be very useful to 
(Plains, Grasslands, Desert, Hills, your civilization. They may act as trade missions, ambassa- 
and Rivers) dors, envoys, secret agents, and saboteurs. They can open 
Clear land for agriculture contacts with other civilizations and establish embassies to 
(Forests, Jungles, and Swamps) gather information about your rivals. They can act as spies, 
Build Fortress (any land square - stealing information and otherwise disrupting your rivals. 
must have Construction) They can bribe enemy armies. When your civilization obtains 
Excavate mines the technology of Writing you can build Diplomats. 
(Mountains, Hills, and Deserts) Be aware that enemy Diplomats can be used against 
Restore forests (Plains, your civilization. 
Grasslands, Swamps, and Jungle) Diplomat Movement: Diplomats may move past en- 
Clear pollution emy armies without stopping. However, if an enemy military 
(any polluted land square) army enters the square occupied by the Diplomat, the Diplo- 
Build Road (any land square) mat is almost always destroyed. Diplomats may travel over- 
Build Railroad (any Road square - seas in ships as other armies do. 
must have Railroad technology) 





37 


38 


Curren 
(Bronze Working) 





aa Marketplace 


Diplomats (and Caravans) are the only units that can enter defended enemy cities. When 
a Diplomat enters an enemy city a menu appears listing tasks that can be performed 
Spy on City 
Establish Embassy 
Steal Technology 
Industrial Sabotage 
Incite A Revolt 
Meet With King 

Spy on City: This opens the enemy’s city display. You can examine what armies are 
defending it and what improvements have been made. When you clear the city screen (press 
the Return key or either mouse button on the IBM), you return to the map display but your 
diplomat has been eliminated. 

Establish Embassy: The Diplomat establishes official contact with the other civilization 
and continually reports thereafter its type of government, treasury, the name of its capital 
city, treaties with other civilizations, states of war, and technology advances the Diplomat 
uncovers. Lists by historians of outstanding civilizations only include those with whom 
you have established embassies. It is only necessary to establish an embassy once with 
any civilization. 

Steal Technology: Your Diplomat steals one technology advance from the other 
civilization. This can only be done once per city and your Diplomat disappears in the process 
(his cover is blown). If you have already stolen from this city, the Diplomat loses its turn. If the 
enemy civilization has nothing new then the Diplomat loses its turn. 

Industrial Sabotage: Your Diplomat destroys either the item currently under produc- 
tion by the city or one of the city’s improvements. You cannot control what is destroyed. The 
Diplomat is lost in the effort. Destroying a critical improvement may throw the city into unrest 
(Temple, Cathedral), weaken its defenses (City walls), or cut its Production (Factory). 
Diplomats never destroy Wonders of the World. 

Incite A Revolt: Your Diplomat contacts dissidents within a city and for a suitable 
payment the city revolts and joins your civilization. The payment to revolt depends on the size 
of the city and its proximity to the civilization’s capital. Also, a city in civil disorder revolts for 
less. Your Diplomat is lost in a successful revolt but escapes outside the city if you refuse to 
pay the cost. The revolt also fails and your Diplomat survives if you don’t have enough cash. 
Enemy capitals do not revolt. 

Meet With King: Your Diplomat opens negotiations with the enemy ruler. This may lead 
to offers for trading technology or for making treaties. Your Diplomat is not lost. 


Caravans 


Democracy 
(Philosophy & Literacy) 


Ih 





Bribing Enemy Units: You may convince an enemy unit to defect and join your 
civilization by moving a Diplomat into its square. A menu appears showing how much the 
army demands to defect. If you accept, the cash is deducted from your treasury, the army 
switches over, and the Diplomat survives. If you fail to make the payment, the Diplomat left 
on deposit is lost. When more than one enemy unit is in a square, bribery is not possible. 

The nearest friendly city becomes the home city for a newly bribed unit (see Home City 
Roster, page 75). 


Caravans are shipments of trade goods and materials. Over time they represent camel 

caravans, wagon trains, truck convoys, and cargo containers. They may be used to establish 

trade routes between cities or to transfer resources for the construction of Wonders Of The 
World. They become available once you have achieved the technology of Trade. 

Trade Routes: A Caravan that enters any city of another civilization or a friendly city ten 
or more squares away from its home city may establish a trade route. This results in an 
immediate cash payment for delivery plus an increase in the trade generated each turn. This 
increased trade means more luxuries, taxes, and science for the home city. 

Each city may have up to three functioning trade routes. If more than three are established 
only the best three function. 

The amount of trade generated depends partly on the size of the two cities. Bigger cities 
generate more trade. Trade is best with a city in another civilization. Next best are friendly 
cities. The farther apart the two cities are, the greater the value of trade. The value is also 
increased when the cities are on different continents. 

Caravans can move into any city they can reach. When at war it may be difficult to 
smuggle goods into an enemy city without being destroyed. Caravans maybe transported 
overseas in ships as other units are, but cannot be landed into a city directly from a ship. 

Building Wonders: A Caravan may contribute its construction cost in resources to the 
cost of building any Wonder of the World by moving the Caravan into the city where the 
Wonder is being built. When the Caravan enters, a menu offers the choice of contributing to 
the construction or not. If you decide to help build the Wonder, the Caravan disappears and 
the resources used to build the Caravan are added to the production of the Wonder, speeding 
its completion. 


39 


The following are the military units that can be built by your civilization. There is a brief 
Military Units description of each unit, including any special abilities. The three numbers shown after the 
unit’s name are its attack, defense, and movement factors. In parentheses after the name is 
shown the advance required before each unit can be built. In brackets is shown the number 
of resources it takes to build each unit. 

Armor10-5-3 (the Automobile) [80]: a group of tanks, or other armored fighting vehicles. 
Due to its high attack factor and speed, Armor is one of the best units for conducting 
ground campaigns. 

Artillery 12-2-2 (Robotics) [60]: a group of self-propelled, heavy caliber artillery pieces. 
Defenders are not tripled behind City Walls when attacked by Artillery because the guns fire 
over the walls, 

Battleship 18-12-4 (Steel) [160]: a heavily armored and gunned warship. Battleships 
have a visibility range of two sea squares and may conduct shore bombardments (seepage 
36). They may not carry ground units. 

Bomber 12-1-8(16) (Advanced Flight) [120]. group of long-range aircraft designed to 
carry and drop bombs. Bombers may stay airborne for one turn but must return to a base (a 
friendly city or Carrier) by the end of the second turn. They have a visibility of two squares 
over any terrain. Bombers ignore City Walls in the same manner as Artillery. They may only 
be attacked by Fighters. Other units may not enter a square occupied by a Bomber, so they are 
useful for interdicting enemy movement. 

Cannon 8-1-1 (Metallurgy) [40]: a group of carnage-mounted, smoothbore cannons. 
Cannons are excellent units on the attack and their arrival often opens a new round of offensive 
wars, especially when accompanied by Riflemen who can stack with them for defense. 

Carrier 1-12-5 (Advanced Flight) [160]: an aircraft carrier is capable of acting as a base for 
Bombers, Fighters, and Nuclear units. Carriers may carry up to eight air units and have a 
visibility of two sea squares. 

Catapult 6-1-1 (Mathematics) [40]: a group of siege weapons designed to throw rocks 
and other materials with great force. Catapults are useful in the defense and attack of cities, 
but are weak when left alone on defense. 

Electricity Cavalry 2-1-2 (Horseback Riding) [20]: a unit of mounted soldiers Cavalry are useful as 
(Metallurgy & Magnetism) scouts and raiders because of their speed. 

Chariot 41-2 (the Wheel) [40]: a group of light carnages, normally mounted on two 
wheels and each carrying a driver and warrior. Chariots area powerful weapon on the attack 
but very weak on defense. They are also useful as scouts because of their speed. 

Cruiser 6-6-6 (Combustion) [80]: a very fast and moderately powerful warship. Cruisers 
have a visibility of two sea squares and may conduct shore bombardment (seepage 36). They 
may not carry ground units. 





40 


Electronics 
(Engineering & Electricity) 


ee Hydro Plant 
ry Hoover Dam 





Fighter 3-3-10 (Flight) [60]:a squadron of fighter aircraft. Fighters are useful as scouts and 
for attacking enemy Bombers. Fighters must return to a friendly base by the end of each turn. 

Frigate 2-2-3 (Magnetism) [40]: a fast sailing warship armed with a substantial number 
of guns. Frigates may carry up to four ground units (see naval transport 34). 

Ironclad 4-4-4 (Steam Engine) [60]: a fast, steam-powered ship armored with iron 
plating. Ironclads may not carry other units. Ironclads are most useful for attacking enemy 
ships and less so for conducting shore bombardments. 

Knights 4-2-2 (Chivalry) [40]: a group of armored warriors mounted on large 
powerful horses. Knights are often a useful combination of speed, defensive strength, and 
offensive strength. 

Legion 3-1-1 (Iron Working) [20]: a well-trained force of infantry armed with 
shields, short swords, and throwing spears. Legions are good offensive units that are 
relatively inexpensive. 

Mechanized Infantry 6-6-3 (Labor Union) [50]: a group of modem infantry mounted on 
armored vehicles like the Bradley. Mechanized infantry is the best defensive ground unit in 
the game, useful for defending cities or other important points. It also has a good attack factor 
and excellent speed. 

Militia 1-1-1 (-) [10]:a band of citizens armed with crude weapons, mostly tools and farm 
implements. Militia are normally the onily military unit that you can build when starting a new 
civilization and are only a stopgap until better units become available. 

Musketeers 2-3-1 (Gunpowder) [30]:a company of infantry armed with muskets. Due 
to their higher defense factor, Musketeers are useful for replacing Phalanxes in positions that 
need to be defended. 

Nuclear 99-0-16 (Rocketry & Nuclear Fission) [160]: a missile weapon armed with a 
nuclear warhead. A Nuclear unit can only be built after the Manhattan Project Wonder has 
been built somewhere in the world. A Nuclear unit may move between cities and Carriers. It 
is lost if it does not end its turn in a city or on a Carrier, and does not attack. It explodes when 
it attacks an enemy unit or city. A Nuclear attack destroys all military units in the target square 
and adjacent squares, regardless of who they belong to. Nuclear attacks may also destroy city 
populations and cause pollution (see Nuclear Weapons, page 53). 

Phalanx 1-2-1 (Bronze Working) [20]: a company of infantry armed with long pikes and 
very strong on the defensive. Phalanxes are very good for defending cities and other 
important points early on. No other type of unit is as cost effective for defense until Musketeers 
become _ available. 

Riflemen 3-5-1 (Conscription) [30]:a company of infantry armed with rifles. Riflemen 
are excellent defenders of cities and other points, and useful for replacing Phalanxes 
and Musketeers. 

Sail 1-1-3 (Navigation) [40]:a small ship powered by sails and lightly armed. Sailing 
Ships may carry up to three other units by naval transport. They are very useful for exploring 
the oceans because they are not restricted to staying near the coasts. 


41 


42 


Barbarians 


Engineerin, 
(The Whee! & Construction) 





Submarine 8-2-3 (Mass Production) [50]: a Warship designed to attack frorn underwater 
by firing torpedoes at enemy ships on the surface. Submarines have a visibility of two sea 
squares and can only be spotted by enemy ships when adjacent. They may not carry ground 
units or conduct shore bombardment. 

Transport 0-3-4 (Industrialization) [50]: a large, modem transport ship. Transports 
may carry up to eight other units and are very useful when carrying a large force to conduct 
an invasion. 

Trireme 1-0-3 (Map Making) [40]: a small ocean-going ship powered by oars. Triremes 
are lost at sea approximately half of the time when they are not adjacent to land at the end of 
a turn. They are normally the first ship that becomes available, and are thus very useful for 
exploring the sea and transporting Diplomats, Caravans, and other units to nearby continents. 


Barbarians are small tribes of raiders that are not part of any opposing civilization. (For 
the IBM version, they are always red units.) You may encounter them periodically as your 
civilization begins to expand and grow. They may invade from the sea or arise suddenly in 
unsettled parts of any continent. Barbarians may attempt to capture or destroy your cities, and 
pillage your fields and mines. 

Because barbarians may appear along any coast or in any unsettled area, it is important 
to defend cities. It may also be useful to screen your cities from unsettled areas so that any 
barbarians that appear may be intercepted before they reach your cities. 

Most barbarian tribes are accompanied by a leader who maybe ransomed if captured. 
Barbarian leaders look like Diplomats. 

Sea Raiders: Barbarians that invade from the sea are looking for a place to settle. They 
search for cities and attempt to capture them. They do not pillage mines and irrigation because 
of their interest in making a permanent settlement. If they capture a city, they take it over and 
begin producing more units to make new assaults. Sea raiders can be fought on land or 
engaged at sea in their ships. 

Land Barbarian: These raiders are interested only in loot, not permanent settlements. 
This makes them very harmful as they pillage any mines or irrigation they encounter. If they 
capture one of your cities, they utterly destroy it. For these reasons, land barbarians are best 
engaged as far from your cities as possible. 

Land barbarians arise in areas that are not within the radius of a city. As time passes they 
appear at even farther distances from civilization. Thus, expanding your cities over a 
continent eventually removes the threat of barbarians appearing because the entire area has 
become more or less civilized by the presence of your cities. 

Ransoming Barbarian Leader: If a barbarian leader is alone in a square and you attack 
him and win, he is captured and immediately ransomed for 100 coins. The money is added 
to your treasury. When barbarian units are attacked and destroyed, leader units stacked with 
them are destroyed also. Barbarian leaders who have lost their armies attempt to escape and 
disappear if not captured in a few turns. 


Types 


Explosives 
(Gunpowder & Chemistry) 








GOVERNMENTS 


To assist in the management of your civilization there is a system of government. There 
are six types of government possible but the ones available to you at any moment depend on 
the technology that your civilization has achieved. One type of government, Anarchy, only 
occurs under a special circumstance. 

When beginning anew game your civilisation is automatically governed by Despotism. 
The additional types become available when the specific civilization advance bearing their 
name is made. (Exception, seethe Wonder of the World, the Pyramids, page 84.) 

The different types of government each have their own unique effects. Some allow 
greater personal and economic freedom resulting in fast growing trade, science, and econo- 
mies, while others are better suited to building and employing large armies. 

Governments are changed by resolutions. 


The 6 governrnents available for a civilization are: 
Despotism 
Anarchy 
Monarchy 
Communism 
The Republic 
Democracy 

Despotism :You rule by absolute power. The people just have to liv with it because your 
will is enforced by the army. Due to the minimal amount of economic and personal freedom, 
production is at a minimum. But your total control makes conducting war relatively easy. 

Military units do not require resource support until the nurnber of units making this their 
home city (shown in the home city roster, seepage 75) exceeds the number of people in the 
city. Each home military unit in excess of the number of people in the city requires one unit 
of resources for industrial support. Diplomats and Caravans do not require support. 

In addition, any rnap square that produces three or more food, resources, or trade has this 
production reduced by one. For example, a mine that normally produces three resources 
produces only two under Despotism. 

Settlers require one food for support. 

Anarchy You have temporarily lost control of government. Cities continue to operation 
their own but some important operations of your civilization come to a halt until control is 
restored. You are able to continue controlling the movements of your units. 

Anarchy has the same effect as Despotism with several exceptions-no tax revenue is 
collected, no maintenance is charged for city improvements, and no scientific research is done 
while Anarchy continues. Anarchy only occurs during revolutions. 


43 


Feudalism 
(Masonry & Monarchy) 





Monarchy: Your rule is less absolute, and more with the acceptance of the people, 
especially an aristocracy of upper class citizens. The aristocratic classes at least have a certain 
amount of economic freedom and this results in the potential for greater production of 
resources, food, and trade. However, the upper classes deduct a share of your civilisation’s 
production as maintenance for military units and luxuries in the larger cities. 

Under a Monarchy, there is no reduction of production in squares that produce three or 
more units of food, resources, or trade. Irrigation of Grasslands and Rivers, plus mining of 
Hills can now pay off with increased production. All military units must be supported by one 
unit of resources. Settlers require two food for support. 

Communism: You are the head of the communistic government, and rule with the 
support of the controlling party. Although this form of government allows more production 
than despotism, the orthodoxy of the party restricts personal and economic freedom, 
limiting trade. On the plus side, corruption is kept to a minimum by the action of the local 
party apparatus. 

Communism has the same effect as Monarchy except that corruption is flat. Instead of 
increasing the farther a city is located from the Palace, all of your cities suffer the same rate of 
corruption. (For further discussion of corruption, see the manual section Corruption,page71.) 

The Republic: You rule over the assembly of city-states formed from the cities that your 
civilisation has established. Each city is an autonomous state, yet also is part of the republic 
that you rule. The people feel that you rule at their request. They have a great deal of personal 
and economic freedom, and this results in greatly increased trade. Your diplomacy is 
reviewed by the Senate and they can override your decisions. 

Grasslands, Rivers, and Hills are as productive as they are under a Monarchy. Also, an 
additional trade unit is generated wherever at least one trade unit already exists. Military units 
each require one resource for industrial support. Settlers require two food. Each military unit 
not in its home city makes one citizen (one city population point) unhappy. 

In addition, the Senate of your government accepts any peace offer made by another 
civilisation, overriding even a desire for war by you. 

Democracy: You rule as the elected executive of a democracy. The people feel that you 
rule because they want you to. The degree of freedom allowed under this government results 
in maximum opportunity for economic production and trade. However, the people also have 
a very strong voice in determining how much economic production is devoted to improving 
the standard of living. As in a republic, some diplomatic decisions are subject to review by 
your Senate. 

Democracy is very similar to The Republic. One difference is that under Democracy there 
is no corruption. Also, if one or more of your sties are in civil disorder for two turns, there is 
a chance each turn thereafter that a revolution may occur. Each military unit not in its home 
city makes two citizens unhappy. 


Governments are changed through a process of revolution. This normally occurs at your 
Revolution comrnand because you wish to change to a type of government more suitable to your plans. 
You may change your civilization’s government type to any for which you have made the 

correct advance. 

To cause a revolution, pull down the Game menu and choose the option “Revolution.” 
After a few turns of Anarchy, a menu appears that lists the government options available 
to your civilization. The new government goes into effect immediately after you make 
your choice. 

If your civilisation possesses the Pyramids, a Wonder of the World, you may change 
governments without passing through Anarchy. This ability is lost after the Pyramids 
become obsolete. 


Flight 
(Combustion & Physics) 


Fighter Unit 





45 


46 


Fusion Power 
(Nuclear Power & 
Superconductor) 





ADVISORS/WORLD REPORTS 


You always have a staff of advisors available who can provide detailed information 
concerning the affairs of your civilization. By consulting with these advisors you can make 
informed decisions about the management of your cities and relations with other civilisations. 
The reports of these advisors can be obtained from the Advisors menu found on the menu bar 
at the map display. 

In addition, there area number of other reports that can be consulted. These are available 
from the World menu on the menu bar. 

The following advisors and world reports can be consulted: 

Advisors 

City Status 
Military Advisor 
Intelligence Advisor 
Attitude Advisor 
Trade Advisor 
Science Advisor 
World Reports 
Wonders of the World 
Top 5 Cities 
Civilization Score 
World Map 
Spaceships 
Demographics 

City Status This report lists the cities in your civilization and shows what they are 
producing. For each city you can read the population size, the amount of food, resources, and 
trade generated, what item is currently being produced, and how near it is to being completed. 

It is useful to consult this advisor at the beginning of your turn to refresh your memory 
about what you are producing and how close it is to completion. You can see at a glance 
whether some critical military unit or Wonder of the World is nearly completed. 

Military Advisor: The first military report shows how many units of each type your 
civilization currently has in existence and is producing. 

Clear the screen to see the second part of the report (for the IBM, press Return, the 
Spacebar, or any mouse button). This part of the report shows the casualties that you have 
taken and inflicted in combat with other civilizations. The casualties are shown by type and 
civilization. Civilizations are differentiated by their color. For example, if one of your rivals 
is the Aztecs, colored yellow, and there is a yellow “I” in the Ironclad row, this indicates that 
you have destroyed one Aztec Ironclad. Your casualties are shown in the first column on the 
left side. 


Genetic Engineering 
(Medicine & 
The Corporation) 





Intelligence Advisor: This report is a summary of information gathered by your 
embassies. For each civilization with whom you have established diplomatic relations, this 
report presents accurate data on the name of their capital, their type of government, the size 
of their treasury, and their diplomatic status with other civilizations. No information appears 
for civilizations with whom you have not established an embassy. (See Diplomats, page 37, 
for a discussion of embassies.) 

You can learn here which civilizations are at war and which are at peace, and with whom. 
You may find it useful to consult this report before attacking another civilisation. For example, 
if two of your neighbors are at war, you may consider passing the opportunity to attack one 
of them yourself. If you do attack, they may make peace with each other and both attack you. 
By leaving them at war, you are free to concentration your own progress while they wear each 
other down. 

A second page of information maybe called up by pressing the Info button. (Click on the 
button with either mouse button on the IBM.) This page reports some additional information 
regarding the apparent goals of the civilization’s leader and the technological advances they 
have made most recently. 

Attitude Advisor: This advisor reports the relative happiness of your citizens. From his 
survey you can see at a glance the number of happy, content, and unhappy citizens in each 
of your cities. This information can be very useful after changing your luxury rate or type of 
government because those changes can have a significant effect on the happiness of your 
citizens. By reviewing this survey you can quickly see where you may have to make 
adjustments in city management to avoid disorder. 

For each of your cities, you see the current population and icons of any city improvements 
that help increase the happiness of the people. At the bottom of the page are totals for the size 
of the population of your entire civilization and percentages of the total that are happy, 
content, and unhappy. 

By examining the roster of improvements for each city, you may see where a city is 
missing a helpful improvement. 

Trade Advisor: Your trade advisor reports for each of your cities how much of its trade 
is directed toward bringing in luxuries, tax revenue, and new ideas (scientific research). The 
amount of luxuries, taxes, and science a city is producing is shown to the right of its name. 
Below the list of cities is a total for tax collections per turn. 

On the right side of the report is a list of city improvements that exist throughout your 
civilization. Only those improvements that cost money for maintenance are listed. The report 
shows how many of each improvement exist and the cost of maintaining them. At the bottom 
of this list is the total of your improvement maintenance costs for this turn. 


47 


Gunpowder 
(nvention & Iron Working) 





By comparing the tax revenue number with the maintenance cost number, you can see 
whether the treasury of your civilization is increasing each turn, shrinking, or remaining the 
same. If your treasury is shrinking, this may be a good time to increase taxes or adjust 
individual cities to produce higher revenue. In an emergency, you may wish to sell an 
improvement to raise cash. 

The final item in the report is labeled “Discoveries” and shows the number of turns 
needed for your scientists to acquire the technology advance that you have directed them to 
seek. The more scientific research done by your cities, the fewer turns required. Note that as 
technology increases, it takes more and more research to make the next breakthrough. 

Science Advisor: Your science advisor keeps track of the technologies that your 
civilization has already achieved and the progress of your scientists toward their next 
advance. (In the IBM version, technology that your civilization was first to learn is shown 
in white.) A chart shows progress toward the next advance. The light bulbs indicate how 
much research has been done. When the box is full of light bulbs, the advance being researched 
is achieved. 

It is possible to continue making advances beyond the basic list that defines civilization 
up to the end of the 20th century. These continuing advances are called Futuristic Advances 
and each one you acquire adds 10 points to your civilization score. 

Wonders of the World: Your geographers maintain a listing of the location of the 
Wonders of the World. When they hear of the construction of a new one they add it to the list. 
By the end of your civilization’s history there maybe as many as 21 Wonders 7 ancient, 7 
medieval, and 7 modem. Knowing where they are maybe useful because capturing the city 
where a Wonder is located adds to the glory of your civilization. 

The geographer’s list shows the Wonder's icon, its name, the city in which it is located, 
and the civilization that built it. Clear the page of ancient Wonders to see the medieval 
Wonders, and clear again to see the modern Wonders. (On the IBM clear the page by pressing 
the Return key or either mouse button.) Note that only existing Wonders appear on the list. 
For more information about the Wonders, see Wonders of the World, page 82. 


Horseback Riding 





Top Five Cities : This report graphically shows the five highest rated sties in the world, 
The five cities are named and their parent civilizations are also listed. Below the names are the 
population rosters of the cities and the icons of any Wonders that have been built there. All 
cities in the world are rated and the five with the highest scores are put on the list. Cities score 
points as follows: 

2 points: For each happy citizen 
1 point: For each content citizen 
10 points: For each Wonder of the World built there 

Note that cities that you have never discovered can be revealed to you in this list. The 
magnificence of these cities has passed by word of mouth to the corners of the world. Your 
geographers and other advisors constantly sift the rumors of travelers and traders for 
information regarding other civilizations. Even though some civilizations are not known to 
you, the splendo r of their cities has reached the ears of your advisors. 

Civilization Score: This is a relative measure of how your civilisation is doing. It is also 
totalled one last time when the game ends to give you a final score for your civilization. You 
can check with your advisor throughout the game to see how you stand. Your ultimate but 
difficult goal is to score over 1,000. Points are scored for the following conditions. 

2 points: For each happy citizen 

1 point: For each content citizen 

20 points: For each Wonder of the World that you possess 
3 points: For each turn of world peace (no wars) 

10 points: For each Futuristic advance 

-10 points: For each map square currently polluted 

At the bottom of the report is a bar graph indicating how far you have advanced towards 
a civilisation score of 1,000. 

World Map: Also the work of your geography department, this is a map of the entire 
known world. Parts of the world that you have not discovered cannot be seen. In addition, this 
map is centered horizontally on your capital. Thus you cannot tell exactly where you are 
located relative to the north and south polar boundaries until you discover them. 

Spaceships: When you contact your space advisors, they can report the progress of any 
spaceship under construction. Select from the menu the civilization whose spaceship you 
wish to examine. Your advisors present a picture of the construction accomplished to date and 
their assessment of what it can carry, its estimated flight time, and its success probability. 

The space race begins once the Apollo Program Wonder of the World has been 
constructed. Thereafter any civilization that has the required technologies may begin building 
parts of a spaceship. 


49 


Once the space race begins, it is important to maintain a watch on the spaceships of your 
rivals. You need to assess when they are likely to launch so that you can plan the size of your 
own ship and its launch date. If you conclude that your ship construction is too far behind to 
catch up, it maybe necessary to mount a military campaign to capture the enemy capital. 
Capturing the enemy capital cancels the enemy spaceship under construction. 

Demographics Your advisors keep track of demographic information regarding your 
civilization in comparison to the others in the world. This information is available in this 
report. It details your civilization’s status in a number of areas and where it ranks in the world. 
Examining this report may offer clues about which civilizations are Your biggest threats. 

The following statistics are shown in the report. 





Demographics Report 
Approval Rating: 
Population: 

GNP: 
Manufactured Goods: 
Land Area: 


Literacy: 
Disease: 


Pollution: 
Life Expectancy: 
Family Size: 


Military Service: 


Annual Income: 


Productivity: 


The % of the people that think you are doing a good job as ruler. 

The number of people within your civilization. 

The total of luxuries and taxes generated by your cities. 

The total of resources generated by your cities. 

The land squares that your units were last to pass through, representing the 
part of the world that is under your influence and control. 

The % of your population that can read. This depends on acquiring the 
advances of the Alphabet, Writing, and Literacy, plus the number of 
Libraries and Universities that your civilization possesses. 

A relative standing based on whether your civilization has acquired the 
advance of Medicine, and the number of Granaries and Aqueducts in your 
cities. 

A comparison of the amount of pollution you are creating versus your 
rivals, measured by the number of smokestacks generated by your cities. 
Arelative number determined by the extent of disease and pollution in your 
civilization. 

A number determined from the amount of excess food generated by your 
cities. Large family size means rapid population growth. 

A relative standing determined from the number of military units you 
possess versus the size of your population, indicating the length of time of 
military service. 

The amount of luxuries and tax revenues your cities generate, divided by 
your population. 

The total of resources, food, and trade generated by your cities, divided by 
your population. 





50 


CIVILOPEDIA 


The Civilopedia is an on-line encyclopedia of Civilization. It includes reference informa- 
tion on over 150 items of significance in the game. For most items there is a two page entry. 
The first page is a description of the item and its historical importance, the second page 
explains the significance of the item in the game. 

The Civilopedia can quickly be consulted from the map display. Pull down the 
Civilopedia menu and select the part that you wish to consult 

Complete all listings (takes several pages). 

Civilization Advances: the 70+ technologies; these are also shown in alphabetical order 
in sidebars on the manual pages and in the Civilization Advances Chart. 

Citv Improvements: the structures you can build in 
Sample Civilopedia Entry = wee he a its working, including the Wonders of 

Military Units: the units that can be built, including 
Diplomats and Caravans. 

CRUISER Terrain Types: the various map square terrains. 
Mititary Unie Miscellaneous: government types, terrain improvements, 
and other game concepts not covered elsewhere. 

After you have selected a section of the Civilopedia,a list 





either mouse button.) 

When. you have finished consulting the Civilopedia, 
close it using the Exit button in the top right comer. (On the 
IBM press, click on the Exit button with either mouse button.) 


Efuisers may bombard unite m coastal land ‘squares. of the entries in that section opens. Choose the item you wish 
[Requires | to learn about. (On the IBM,click on the one you wish with the 
|\_ Combustion o | LMB or use the keypad keys to move the highlight and press 
leer re | the Return key to select.) This opens a page of the Civilopedia. 

ctense | After reading this page, clear it to read the next page if one 
eet rae ef t exists. (On the IBM press either the Return key, Spacebar, or 





52 


Industrial Pollution 


Cleanup 


Effects 


PLANETARY CARETAKING 


One cost of heedless industrial growth is a gradual polluting and poisoning of the 
environment. Of the many dangers posed by pollution, the greatest maybe global warming. 
An unchecked rise in the planet's atmospheric temperature threatens catastrophic geographic 
changes including melting polar ice caps, rising sea levels, and parched farmlands. As you 
steer your civilization into the industrial age, you must manage your cities to minimize 
pollution and prevent global warming. 

Different kinds of poisoning may occur when nuclear weapons are used or a nuclear 
reactor melts down. 


Every game turn there is a probability of pollution occurring within the economic radius 
of each of your cities. The probability of pollution occurring depends on two factors: resources 
and population. The most important factor is the number of resources the city generates. The 
more that are generated, the higher the probability. Below a certain level, there is no chance 
of pollution. 

The city’s population has no effect on pollution until you acquire the advance of the 
Automobile. Thereafter, the population may become a significant factor in the probability of 
pollution occurring. 

When there is a probability of pollution occurring at a city, smokestacks begin appearing 
on the city display. The number of stacks indicates the probability. For example, a city 
generating a large number of resources each turn (say 20) and inhabited by a large population. 
may show five smokestacks in its city display. This indicates that the probability of a new 
square becoming polluted is 5% this turn. 


Pollution can be cleaned up by Settler units. Move the Settler onto the polluted square and 
press the Pollution key (the P key for the IBM). The Settler is marked with a "P" to note that 
it has been ordered to cleanup pollution. 

After four turns of work, the pollution disappears. Adding more Settlers to a polluted 
square does not speed the cleanup. 


Pollution reduces the production of food, industry, and trade in any map square where 
it appears. Production is halved and then rounded up. For example, a square that produced 
4 food, 1 industry, and 2 trade before pollution produces only 2 food, 1 industry, and 1 trade 
after. When cleaned up, the map square returns to pre-pollution levels of production. 


Monitoring Pollution 


Global Warming 


Nuclear Pollution 


Your environmental advisors immediately inform you when any map area becomes 
polluted. The area on the map is marked with smudges (black in the IBM version) to 
indicate pollution. 

The extent of pollution throughout your civilization can be monitored by watching the 
pollution indicator, a small sun in the date window of the map display. The color of the sun 
indicates the extent of the risk of global warming. The colors in the IBM version range from 
dark red, to light red, to yellow, to white. Dark red indicates a low risk and white indicates a 
very high risk. 

The colors of the sun depend on the number of squares currently polluted and a lag of 
time. The more squares polluted, the higher the risk. The lag reflects the time required for the 
pollution to take effect. 


Effects: Global warming causes geographic changes throughout the world. Deserts, 
Plains, and Grasslands on coasts may become Swamps, and coastal Forests may become 
Jungles. Plains, Grasslands, and Forests in the interior may become Deserts. The result is much 
lower food, industry, and trade for your civilization. 

Your environmental advisors report immediately if global warming has occurred. The 
effect is always bad, but in the case of flooded coastal areas you may improve Jungles and 
Swamps over time. 

Causes: Global warming may occur if at least nine map squares, anywhere in the world, 
are currently polluted. If they are left unattended for too long, environmental damage occurs. 

Once an environmental disaster has occurred, the cycle starts over again. The planet has 
achieved equilibrium at the new higher temperatures. If pollution continues or increases once 
more to high levels, another bout of environmental problems may occur. This cycle may 
repeat endlessly if pollution is not controlled. 


Pollution may also be caused by nuclear weapons or the meltdown a nuclear power 
plant. Pollution caused by either of these events has the same effect as industrial pollution. 

Nuclear Weapons: When a nuclear unit is used in an attack, an additional effect of the 
attack is the pollution of a number of map squares around the impact square. Remember this 
when you are tempted to use nuclear weapons. You ma y create pollution you cannot readily 
reach with Settlers to clean up, significantly raising the risk of global warming. 


53 


54 


Industrialization 
(Railroad & Banking) 


Transport Unit 





Nuclear Meltdown If a Nuclear Power Plant melts down, half of the city’s population 
is destroyed and a random number of squares near the city become polluted. 

There is risk of meltdown when a city that has a Nuclear Power Plant goes into civil 
disorder (see page 66). The civilian unrest may result in safety procedures becoming so lax that 
a catastrophic accident occurs. If you build Nuclear Power Plants in any of your cities, take 
special care not to allow those cities to go into disorder. 

When your civilization achieves the technology of Fusion Power, the risk of meltdown 
disappears. Your Nuclear Plants automatically convert to the technology of fusion power, 
which is free of the risk of meltdown. 


Invention 
(Engineering & Literacy) 








DIPLOMACY 


Diplomacy is conducted by negotiations between yourself and a ruler of a rival 
civilisation. Negotiations may occur when a rival sends an envoy to talk or may result from 
overtures of your own. Diplomacy is conducted face-to-face with one rival ruler at a time 
and can lead to exchanges of technology, offers of peace, international extortion, or declara- 
tions of war. 

A rival may contact you when units from each of your civilizations are adjacent to each 
other. A rival envoy may also arrive at any time. You may start negotiations by sending a 
Diplomat into a rival city and selecting the option “Meet With the King.” 

The tone and result of any negotiations are greatly influenced by the mood of your rival. 
The opposing leader maybe antagonistic, supplicating, or some where in between. This mood 
depends on the leader’s personality and how your two civilizations compare to each other and 
to the rest of the world. You may be able to pick up cues on a rival’s mood from facial 
expressions or background music. 

A rival leader's personality maybe aggressive, friendly, or neutral. Aggressive leaders 
are more likely to lean toward war or demand high payments for peace. Friendly leaders are 
more likely to offer peace and may only be bluffing when asking for payment. If you have 
broken previous peace agreements with this civilization, that is remembered and also 
influences the degree of antagonism. 

If you are the largest, most powerful, and richest civilisation in the world, all rivals are 
likely to be very jealous or antagonistic. However, if the opponent is puny in comparison, the 
natural tendency toward being belligerent may be overridden. A civilization threatened with 
extinction is more interested in survival. 

All negotiations end with either an agreement of peace between your two civilizations 
or a declaration of war. Even the most antagonistic rival may concede peace for a suitable 
payment of cash or technology. This may purchase peace only temporarily, however. 

Establishing embassies with other civilizations can be very useful in preparation for 
negotiations. Your Intelligence Advisor collects information from all of your embassies and 
from him you can learn important facts about your opponents, including their size and the 
personality of their leader. This information is not available for civilizations with which you 
have not established an embassy. 

Trading Technology Civilizations that are not extremely antagonistic may offer to trade 
technology. They begin by offering one that you don’t possess. They may actually have 
several you lack. If you agree, a menu of technologies they can trade appears. Select the one 
that you want and then they take one from you. You have no choice regarding what they 
take and cannot veto the trade. If after trading another exchangers possible, more trading may 
take place. 


55 


56 


Iron Working 
(Bronze Working) 





qt Legion Unit 


Peace 





Buying Peace: A rival mav demand a cash payment or a civilization advance during 
negotiation.If you meet this demand, the rival almost certainly agrees to peace. If you reject 
the demand, an antagonistic rival generally declares war. The demand of a more peaceful or 
threatened rival may only be a bluff, and peace maybe offered anyway after demands are 
rejected. In some cases, a rival offers a reward for your making peace or declaring war on 
another civilization. 

Post-Treaty Negotiations: Once you agree to a peace treaty you have anopportunity for 
further negotiations. A menu opens offering three choices. a declaration of harmony, a 
military proposal, or a demand for tribute. The declaration of harmony has no real effect. A 
military proposal is a suggestion by you for your new friends to attack a third party. This 
generally costs you a cash payment which you can pay or turn down. 

The third option is ademand for tribute to cement the new treaty you have signed. If your 
opponent is weak or in awe of your power, he may pay. Alternatively, he may refuse to pay, 
or go so far as to declare war on you. 


Peace between your civilisation and another can only result from diplomacy. If you and 
your rival agree, then a state of peace can occur. Choosing peace is voluntary unless your 
government is a Republic or Democracy. In those cases the Senate of the government 
overrules any decision for war and accepts peace. 

Peace agreements can normally be broken at any time by either party, but so long as it 
holds, both parties must adhere to the following rules: units of the other civilisation, even 
Diplomats, may not be attacked; no units except Diplomats and Caravans may enter squares 
that have been improved by the other party within the radius of a city (irrigated, mined, or 
penetrated by roads); squares that the other party has under development may not be 
pillaged; and technology may not be stolen from the other party. Any of these events ends the 
peace and triggers war. You are warned that you are about to break a peace and have a chance 
to check your action. 

If your government is a Republic or Democracy, you may not voluntarily violate a peace 
agreement. The Senate forbids any action that starts war. If you consider war necessary, you 
must have a Revolution to overthrow the government and put in one more receptive to your 
wishes. Alternatively, you may wait for your opponent to break the peace himself or declare 
war on you. 

When you are at peace it is much easier for trade Caravans to reach the sties of the other 
party and establish trade routes. If the entire world is at peace, your civilisation score is 
increased. The major benefit of peace is that you are not at war. During war, all of the 
proscribed activities are possible, and can cause great damage and waste of resources. 


Spaceship Display 


Habitation 
Module 


Life Support 
Module 


Solar Panel 
Module 








THE SPACE RACE 


The environmental pressures of growing populations in the modem world are forcing 
humans to look into space for resource sand living room. The question is not whether humans 
are to travel to the stars, but when. The final act of stewardship you can perform for your 
civilization is to insure that they lead this exodus. 

As noted earlier,the history of your civilization ends when either you or one of your rivals 
reaches a nearby star system with colonists. If your spaceship is the first to arrive, you receive 
a bonus to your civilisation score in recognition of this final accomplishment. Regardless of 
how rnany colonists your spaceship is carrying or how fast it is, if a rival rakes planet fall first, 
you receive no bonus. 

The construction of spceships may not begin until one civilizution has built the Apollo Program 
Wonder. Thereafter, the race is on and any civilisation that has acquired the necessary 
advances may begin building the parts of a spaceship. 

Each civilization, including yours, may build only one spaceship at a time. Once it is launched, 
another one cannot be built and sent off. Ships that have been launched may not be recalled 
or turned around. Spaceships are destroyed if the owning civilization’s capital is captured. In 
this case, a new ship maybe constructed. 


Spaceships 


The purpose of your 
spaceship is to carry as many 
colonists as possible to an- 
other star system. To have 
any chance of success it 
must provide at least a 
minimum of the following 
living space for colonists, food 
; sources, energy sources, 
poeusion propulsion power, and fuel 

omponent f : 
or the engines. The better 
prepared the spaceship, the 
higher the number of colo- 
nists that arrive safely and 
Tauinch Button the faster the voyage. 


Structure Fuel Component 


57 


58 


Your goal is to build a spaceship that can hold as many colonists as possible, yet travel 
at a reasonable speed and with a reasonable probability of success. As construction of your 
ship proceeds, keep an eye on its characteristics, displayed to the right of the spaceship 
window. All spaceships have the same characteristics: population, food, energy, mass, fuel, 
flight time, and probability of success. 

Once you have built a spaceship that meets the minimum requirements for carrying 
colonists, you may launch or proceed with further construction to increase the capacity of 
the ship. 

Population: The number of people the spaceship is outfitted to carry. The more people 
it carries to the new planet, the higher your bonus. 

Support:Thepercentage of the people that the ship is prepared to carry that can currently 
be supported. People that are not provided with life support cannot be expected to survive 
the voyage. 

Energy: The percentage of the energy required by the habitation and life support 
modules that is currently being provided. If sufficient energy is not provided for life support 
and habitation, the probability of success will be very low. 

Mass:Allof the components, modules, and structures add to the mass of your spaceship. 
The greater the mass, the more power required from propulsion parts to move it. 

Fuel: The percentage of the fuel your propulsion units require that is currently aboard. 
If insufficient fuel is provided, the propulsion components aboard cannot work to their 
maximum power and the best possible speed cannot be attained. 

Flight Time:A calculation of the number of years required for your spaceship to reach 
the nearest star based on the ship’s mass and engine power. Adding more engines and fuel 
reduces flight time. 

Probability of Success: The approximate percentage of the people that can be carried that 
are expected to survive the voyage, based on the amount of food and energy provided, plus 
the flight time. The faster the flight, the higher the expected survival rate. 

Space Ship Launching: To send your spaceship on its voyage, press the Launch key (the 
L key for the IBM) or the Launch button, found at the bottom right of the spaceship display. 


Your spaceship is constructed of parts. Each part is built like any other improvement, 


Construction except that when a part is completed, it is automatically added to your ship. The parts of the 


spaceship come in three types: components, modules, and structures. Each type is available 
for construction when you have achieved a specific technology advance. 

All modules and components must be connected to a sufficient structure. If a module or 
component is not connected, it is marked (outlined in red on the IBM) to signal the part is not 
working. Once sufficient structural parts have been added, the outline disappears. 


To build spaceship components you must have achieved the technology advance of 
Plastics. You can then build components at a cost of 160 resources. There are two kinds of 
components, propulsion and fuel. When a component has been completed, you choose which 
type has been built. 

Propulsion Components: These are the engines that provide the power for space flight. 
The more engines you add, the faster the ship travels, the sooner it reaches its destination, and 
the higher the probability of success of the mission. 

Fuel Components: These provide fuel for the propulsion units. In order for the 
propulsion units to perform to their maximum, one fuel component must be provided for each 
propulsion component. 


Spaceship modules require the technology of Robotics and cost 320 resources each to 


Modules build. They exist in three types: habitation, life support, and solar panels. When a module is 


completed, you choose which type to add to your ship. 

Habitation Module: Each habitation module provides living space, community ser- 
vices, and recreational facilities for ten thousand colonists. 

Life Support Module: Each life support module provides the food and other require- 
ments for the ten thousand colonists carried in one habitation module. People carried in a 
habitation module that doesn’t receive life support have a very low probability of surviving. 

Solar Panel Module: Each solar panel module provides enough energy to power two of 
the other types of module. Modules that don’t receive power cannot function properly. 


Spaceship structures require the technology of Space Flight and cost 80 resources each 


Structures to build. You must build sufficient structure parts to connect the components and modules 


Labor Union 
(Mass Production & 
Communism) 


s| Mech, Inf. Unit 





together. Parts that are not connected do not work and provide no benefit to the ship. 


59 


, ee ee 





60 


3. CITIES 





CITIES 


The economic and industrial centers of your civilization are its cities. They are the 
residence of the population, the source of tax dollars, the home of your scientists, and the sites 
of your industrial production. Each city organizes the development of the area surrounding 
it, converting the nearby agricultural land, natural resources, and potential trade into food, 
industrial production, technology, and cash. 

One measure of the success of your civilization is the number of cities it encompasses and 
the size of each. Larger cities collect more taxes, conduct more technology research, and 
produce new items faster. Small civilizations, both in numbers of cities and the sizes of each, 
risk being overrun by larger and more powerful neighbors. Falling too far behind in the arms 
race, both in quality and quantity, may result in an early exit from history. 

The management of your civilization involves the founding of cities, their management, 
and their protection. New cities can be built from scratch or captured from rivals. Managing 
a city requires maintaining a balance of food, industry, taxes, luxuries, and improvements that 
keeps the citizens content and productive. 

Rival civilizations are a constant threat to the security of your cities. After taking steps to 
protect them, consider conquering cities of your rivals. This reduces the threat they pose and 
is often an inexpensive way to expand. 


New cities can reacquired in three ways. They can be started from scratch, a minor tribe 

New Cities discovered by your armies may elect to join you as a new city, or your armies can conquer the 
cities of your neighbors. 

Founding New Cities: When a Settler unit is on a map square where you wish to build 

a new city, press the Build key (the B key on the IBM). You can accept a name your advisors 

propose for the new city or type in a name you prefer. Enter the name when you are satisfied. 

(Press the Return key on the IBM). The city display then opens so that production and 

economic development can be arranged as desired. When the display is closed, the new city 

is on the map and the Settler unit has disappeared, having become the first citizens of the city. 


61 


62 


Placing New Cities 


Literacy 
(Writing & Code of Laws) 





Minor Tribes: As your armies explore the world they may encounter minor 
tribes. Occasionally a minor tribe may be sufficiently awed by your emissaries to 
immediately become part of your civilization. In this case, the minor tribe forms a new city of 
your civilization. 

Capturing Cities: Cities of other civilizations are normally defended. If the defenders can 
be destroyed, a friendly army may move into the city and capture it. A captured city is 
thereafter managed and controlled by you in the same manner as any other city. 
Capturing an enemy city may also result in the discovery of a new technology advance 
and plundered cash. 

Occupying an enemy city may destroy some improvements the city has built, and it 
eliminates one point of population. Therefore, a city that has only one point of population 
remaining is destroyed instead of captured. 


When building anew city, plan carefully where it is placed. The map square in which it 

is built and the squares surrounding it determine how valuable the city can become. Factors 

to be consideredinclude the economic value of the square the city is placed in, the economic 

potential within the citv’s radius, the proximityof other cities, and the strategic value of the 

location. Ideally, locate cities in areas that offer a combination of food for population growth, 

resources for production, and trade. Where possible, take advantage of the presence of special 
resource squares. 

The City Square :Theterrainthecity occupies is especially important because it is always 
under development. You cannot take workers off of this square when adjusting development 
on the city map (see City Map, page 69). If this area is not useful, especially for producing food, 
then population growth in a new city is handicapped. For this reason, new cities are generally 
best built in Plains, Grasslands, or Rivers. These provide the best food production and, thus, 
faster population growth. 

The City Radius: The potential area of development extends out from a city two squares 
on the map in every direction except diagonally. If the city grows large enough, its population 
can bring all of this area into development. When planning a new city, consider this radius and 
the long-term benefits of any potential site. 

To grow, the city must encompass sufficient food-growing areas. Any city that can grow 
has value, but your most important cities are those that also have resources available. These 
cities can quickly build and support military units and Wonders. Hills and Forests are 
important sources of resources, as are squares containing special resource symbols for game, 
horses, coal, and oil. 

The importance of trade in generating taxes and technology makes River squares 
especially good sites for cities when just beginning. Without Rivers, you must quickly build 
roads in Plains or Grasslands to generate trade. 


Landscaping: When surveying sites for a new city, keep in mind the potential for some 
squares to be improved. Hills and Mountains can be mined and then produce increased 
resources. Plains, Rivers, and Grasslands can be irrigated and then produce more food. 
Swamps and Jungles can be cleared into Grasslands or converted to Forests. Forests maybe 
cleared into Plains. Plains and Grasslands may be turned into Forests if you need resources. 
An area of Jungles and Swamps looks barren at first, but has the potential to be a very rich 
city site. 

Plains, Grasslands, and Deserts produce trade once penetrated by Roads, and all land 
squares improve in production when Railroads come through. 

Proximity of Cities: Another consideration when planning new cities is the current or 
potential location of other cities. Minimize the economic radius overlap of your cities as much 
as possible. Since a map area may only be used by one city, too much overlap restricts the 
potential growth of one or both cities. When just beginning, explore nearby lands as soon as 
possible to begin planning the placement of future cities to best take advantage of the terrain. 
A few large and powerful cities are more useful than several smaller, weaker ones. 

Strategic Value: The strategic value of a city’s site is a final consideration. Because the 
underlying terrain can increase the defender’s strength when under attack, in some circum- 
stances the defensive value of terrain maybe more important than economic value. But good 
defensive terrain is generally poor for food production and inhibits the early growth of a city. 

However, defending a city is generally easier than defending normal terrain. In a city you 
can build the City Walls improvement which triples the strength of defenders. Also, in cities 
only one army at a time is destroyed in combat. Outside of cities, all armies stacked together 
are destroyed when any army in the stack is defeated. So, in certain cases where a continent 
bottlenecks and a rival is on the other side, the defensive value of a city site may be more critical 
than economic value. 

Placing at least a few cities on the seacoast gives you access to the ocean. This allows the 
launching of ship units to explore the world and transport your units overseas. With few 
coastal cities, your seapower is constrained. 


There are several goals for management of a city keeping it stable (avoiding Civil disorder), 
City Management keeping its population growing, maximizing a useful mix of economic development (food, 
resources, and trade), producing tax revenue, producing technology research, and producing 
useful units and improvements. 
Stability: Cities that don’t maintain a favorable balance of happy people over unhappy 
people go into civil disorder (see below). Cities in civil disorder produce no tax revenue, no 
technology research, and no food surpluses, and suspend production. A nuclear reactor in a 
city suffering civil disorder may experience a meltdown due to lax safety controls (see Nuclear 
Meltdown, page 54). Keeping a city stable is a very high priority. 


63 


64 


Magnetism 
(Navigation & Physics) 


Frigate Unit 





Population Growth: Keeping the population growing is important because each addi- 
tional person contributes something to your civilization. Each new worker brings a new map 
square under production. Population growth increases economic power, and thus, the 
strength of your civilization. The size of your population is a major factor in determining your 
civilization score, a measure of how well you have ruled. 

Resource Development The people of your city that work in the surrounding country- 
side harness the economic resources of the area. Those resources are converted by the city into 
more people, industrial production, money, and technology research. When managing a city, 
you must allocate the people so as to maximize this development, or match it up to your needs. 

There may be times when increased industrial output is preferred over population 
growth. There may be times when increased trade is needed. You can give orders to your 
advisors to shift a city’s work force around to change the mix of economic development 
as desired. 

Tax Revenue Most of the improvements that can be built within cities require money for 
maintenance. Money is also useful for speeding industrial production (see Rush Jobs, page 
74), bribing enemy armies (see page 74), inciting revolts in enemy cities (seepage 38), and for 
negotiating peace with your neighbors. The combined tax revenues of your cities must exceed 
their maintenance requirements before cash can accumulate for other uses. 

Although it is not necessary for each city to produce surplus revenue, enough cities must 
do so to cover expenses. Some cities may not be especially suited for industrial production, 
but may still be good trading centers. Manage these cities to produce extra revenue. 

Technology Research: The greater the contribution of research each city makes toward 
new technology, the faster the new civilization advance is reached. The amount of research 
done in each city is a function of the science rate. This is a percentage of the city’s trade that 
is devoted to bringing in new ideas and otherwise discovering technology advances. A city's 
research contribution can also be influenced by adjusting trade, creating Scientists (see page 
72), and certain improvements. Improvements that can help are the Library and University, 
which improve research, and several Wonders. 

Industrial Production Each city has more or less capacity to produce new units and 
improvements. The most valuable cities have the greatest industrial capacity. They can 
quickly produce expensive military units that extend the power of your civilization. They are 
also best at producing the Wonders of the World. You must regularly monitor the production 
of your cities to insure that the most needed items are being built. 

There are four main tools available to reach and maintain these goals of city management 
shifting workers around, converting some workers to Specialists, building improvements, and 
building Wonders of the World. 

Workers can be shifted around the city map display to adjust economic development (see 
the manual section City Map, page 69). Specialists can be created to increase production of 
luxuries, taxes, or technology (see the manual section Specialists, page 72). 


City Protection 


Map Making 
(Alphabet) 


Trireme Unit 





Lighthouse 








Within each city you can order the construction of improvements such as a Temple to 
make some unhappy people content, a Granary to speed population growth, or a Library to 
increase research. See the manual section City Improvements, page 78, or consult the 
Civilopedia for the list of possible city improvements. From either source you can also learn 
the construction and maintenance cost of each improvement, its purpose, and what technol- 
ogy is required to make it available. 

The most costly tools available are the Wonders of the World. These are magnificent 
improvements that bring lasting glory to your civilization in addition to some special effect. 
The possible Wonders are described in the manual section Wonders of the World, page 82, or 
in the Civilopedia. Although Wonders are built in a city like an improvement, their special 
effect often extends through all or part of your civilization. However, only one of each Wonder 
may be built in the entire world and your rivals may construct them first. 


Great economic management of a city is worthless if the city is captured by rivals or 
barbarians. Part of the management plan must concern the defense of the city. A large part of 
the defense is not handled locally, but on your borders and coasts. A defensive line of units, 
both at sea and on land, that can intercept enemies before they close with your cities can 
be helpful. 

Even the best defensive lines can be penetrated, so the defense of the city itself cannot be 
neglected. The minimum city defense is one army, preferably one with a good defense factor. 
Fortify any armies that you expect to defend a city (by pressing the F key on the IBM) because 
Fortified units increase thei defense strength. A second defender is often a good idea. Adding 
an army with a strong attack factor is also useful. This army can attack enemies that move 
adjacent to the city, perhaps destroying them before they test the defenders. 

The defense of the city can be substantially improved by building City Walls, an 
improvement that triples the defender’s strength versus most attackers, but not Bombers or 
Artillery. This tripling takes effect after the effects of veteran status is considered. Being 
fortified behind City Walls has no effect unless the attacking unit is a Bomber or Artillery unit. 
City Walls also prevent population loss when defending units are destroyed. 

When civilization advances make available new army types with better defense factors, 
take the first opportunity to replace old defenders with better units. Since the offensive 
capability of your enemies improves as they acquire new technology, your defenses must 
improve to keep up. 

Linking cities with Roads and Railroads can be very helpful in speeding the movement 
of units from one end of your empire to trouble spots elsewhere. This puts your defensive 
armies on “interior lines," allowing them to rapidly move to where they are needed. 





65 


A city suffers civil disorder when unhappy people outnumber happy people, content 
Civil Disorder _ people being ignored in the calculation. Cities in disorder provide no tax revenue, contribute 
no technology research, and suspend production of new units or improvements. When 
order is restored, the city returns to normal operation next turn. You can restore order in 
several ways. 

To restore order you may pay to complete an improvement, such as a Temple, that can 
convert sufficient unhappy people to contentment (or content people to happiness) to restore 
balance. See the manual section Rush Jobs, page 74, for how to do this. 

You may also change the luxury and tax rates of yourcivilization to attempt to restore 
order. Increasing luxuries may convert some content people to happy. 

You may take one or more people out of the work force, making them Specialists. This 
increases the number of happy people. For information on how to do this, see the manual 
section Specialists, page 72. When creating Specialists, be careful not to also cause shortages 
of food or resources that cause starvation of population or scrapping of armies. 

Under the government types Despotism, Monarchy, or Communism, it is possible to 
restore order to a city using martial law. Each military unit in a city makes one unhappy citizen 
content. Only those units possessing an attack factor of 1 or more can impose martial law. By 
moving enough units into a city suffering disorder, order maybe restored. 

Under Republican or Democratic government, each military unit not in its home city 
creates one or more unhappy citizen. When a city is in disorder, destroying distant military 
units, returning them to the home city, or changing their home city, makes some happy 
people content and may restore the city to order. 

All of these methods are useful in restoring the balance of your cities or enemy cities that 
you have just captured. 





When a city becomes sufficiently happy, it may hold a celebration in honor of your rule. 
We Love The The people declare a "We Love the (King) Day” in thanks for the prosperity you have made 
(King) Day possible. While the circumstances that trigger this celebratory mood continue, the city enjoys 
certain benefits, depending on your civilization’s type of government. 
In order for the "We Love the (King) Day” celebration to occur, there must be no unhappy 
people in the city, at least as many happy people as content people, and the city must have a 
population of at least three. Specialists are considered content citizens for this calculation. For ” 
example, a city with five happy people, four content people, and no unhappy people 
celebrates. A city with ten happy people, three content people and one unhappy person 
does not. 





Palace 


City Walls 


Anarchy: The celebration has no effect when the government is in Anarchy. 

Despotism: The celebrating city is operated as if the govemrnent is a Monarchy. This can 
increase the amount of food and resources generated when some terrains are irrigated 
and mined. 

Monarchy/Communism: A celebrating city currently ruled by either of these gover- 
nments is operated as if the government is a Democracy instead. This increases the amount of 
trade generated. 

Republic/Democracy : A celebrating city currently ruled by either of these governments 
increases in population by one point each turn so long as sufficient food is available. This can 
result in dramatic growth of the city. 


67 


City Display 


Population Roster 


City Resources 
Window 


Home City ~~ 


Fo 


Improvements 
Roster 
CATHEDRAL 
FOOD STORAGE 
nialadlalalalalalaalalamn eal gale RRRERRERRERREReR Re 
nlalalalatatalatalatalaldie ten Met OnLc RRRRRRERRERRRRRRERED, 
nlalalalalalalalalalalald RRURREREREREEE SERED. 4 
nialalalalalalalalalalald — Production 
hialalalalalalalalalalald Box 
nialalalalalalalatalalald : 
bialalalalalalale 
/ \ \ 
Storage Box Information Window Exit Button 








THE CITY DISPLAY 


The operation of each city is directed from its city display. Here you assign the population 
to work in the surrounding. fields, mines, forests, and fishing grounds. Here also you 
determine what unit or other item the city is to produce. The display provides in one place 
critical information concerning the city’s status how much food, resources, and trade it is 
generating; what it is producing and how close the item is to completion; the happiness of the 
population; what is defending the city; and what improvements have been built. 

This display is opened from the map window. (On the IBM, click the LMB on the city’s 
map square.) The city display is closed with the exit button. (On the IBM, click the LMB on the 
exit button.) 

The city display consists of the following parts: city map, city resources 
window, population roster, food storage box, production box, improvement roster, 
information window, and the home city window. Each part performs a specific function or 
reports information. 


© 
i) 
9. 
i) 
0. 
9. 





This shows the map squares surrounding the city that may be developed by the city’s 


City Map population. The maximum numberof squares that a city may put in development equals the 


ee 
VO WAAAA 
oo 28 wat 
VAAN 
wu vt 

Wi 


City Resources Window 


Tax Revenue 





number of people plus one, but the additional one is always the city square itself. Note that 
it is possible to have more population than places to put them to work. 

Depending on the type of terrain in a map square, putting people to work there may 
generate food (the grain symbol), resources (the shield symbol) or trade (the arrows symbol). 
Most squares produce a combination of several items. You may move people from one square 
to another as you wish to change the mix of food, resources, and trade the city generates. 

People removed from the city map are temporarily converted into Specialists (see below) 
in the population roster. When they are put back to work on the map, they convert back to 
normal people. (To remove people on the IBM, place the mouse pointer on the correct map 
square and click the LMB. To put them back to work, place the pointer on the city map square 
where you wish them to go and click the LMB again.) As people are removed, replaced, and 
switched around, the resources generated by theaty also change. 

When the city population increases, the new people are 
automatically assigned an area to develop. You may wish to 
Map Square review the map of a city that has just increased in size to be 
in Ube certain the workers have been placed as you wish. 


Map Square City Resources Window 
Not in Use 
This window shows the amounts of food, resources, 


trade, corruption, luxuries, taxes, and scientific research gen- 
Unavailable erated by the city’s people. These commodities are the raw 
Square materials of your civilization. They are brought into the city 
and there become new people, new units, city improvements, 
Wonders of the World, cash, and civilization advances. 
Food, resources, and trade are collected each turn from 
the city map squares. In some cases the amount of a commodi- 
ty collected may be increased by the presence of a certain 
_ Surplus Food | improvement in the city, or ownership of a certain Wonder. 
(After Break) | For example, a Factory improvement increases resource pro- 


Surplus duction by 50’%. A city that produces 10 resources from its city 
~ Resources map actually has 15 resources to spend if it possesses a 
(After Break) | Factory. Trade is further divided into three commodities that 
Corruption it brings in: luxuries, cash, and science (knowledge). The 
(Lost Trade) division of trade depends on the trade rates shown in the 


Science Research 


status report of the map display. Under certain conditions, 
some trade is lost as corruption. 


69 


70 


Mass Production 
(Automobile & 
The Corporation) 


Submarine Unit 





Mass Transit 





Food: A population point in your city requires two units of food each turn. If your city 
is currently producing more food than that, the surplus is shown after a break in the food 
line. The excess goes into the food storage box shown elsewhere on the city display and 
described below. 

If you are not producing enough food to feed the population, the amount of food that you 
are short is shown as a shortfall in the food line (on the IBM, a shortfall is shown by black food 
symbols). Each turn this shortage cannot be made up from food in storage the city's 
population decreases by one point. 

Existing Settler units that a city has produced also require one or two food units per turn, 
depending on your type of government. 

Resources The shield symbols indicate the resources of raw materials and industrial 
capacity of the city. Depending on the form of government of your civilization, part of your 
capacity may be required to maintain units that the city has previously built. Surplus capacity 
is shown to the right of a break in the industry line and is available to be used to build new units 
or city improvements. This surplus goes into the production box shown elsewhere on the 
display and described below. 

If the city’s industrial capacity is not sufficient to maintain existing units for which this 
is the home city, the amount of resources that you are short is shown in the resource line as 
a shortfall (on the IBM, the symbols are black). If the resources available are not sufficient to 
maintain all existing units, then units not maintained are destroyed wherever they exist, 
beginning with the one farthest from the city. 

Diplomats and Caravans do not require maintenance under any form of government. 

The basic amount of resources generated maybe increased by improving the city with 
a Factory, Manufacturing Plant, Power Plant, Nuclear Plant, or Hydro Plant. The Hoover Dam 
Wonder improves the resources for all of your cities on its continent. 

Trade: Trade is produced by Roads through Plains and Grasslands, by Rivers, by 
Oceans/Lakes, by squares containing Gold Mines or Gems, and by Caravan trade routes. 
Trade arrives as luxuries, taxes, and scientific research, depending on your trade rates. For 
example, if your luxury/tax/science rates shown on the map display are 3.3.4,3070 of your 
trade arrives as luxuries, 30% as tax revenue, and 40% as science. At these rates, a city 
generating ten trade would convert that into three diamonds of luxuries, three coins of taxes, 
and four light bulbs of research. 

Trade may be increased by trade routes established by Caravans, by certain types of 
government, by the Colossus Wonder, and when a city celebrates"We Love the (King) Day” 
(see page 66). 


Population Roster 


pabmyRa ¢Pop:1,050/000) 


= 
sai | 
a 


Unhappy People 





Luxuries: These are shown as diamonds. For every two diamonds of luxuries produced, 
one content citizen becomes happy. Luxuries are most useful for making people happy, 
especially in very large cities that may have a large segment of unhappy people that need to 
be countered. 

The amount of luxuries generated maybe increased quickly by creating Entertainers, a 
type of Specialist discussed below. Luxuries maybe increased by raising the luxury rate of 
trade brought in. Luxuries are best increased by increasing the amount of trade the city 
generates. The amount of luxuries brought in by trade may be increased by a Market place 
or Bank. 

Tax Revenues: These are shown as gold coins and are used to pay maintenance costs for 
city improvements. Surplus taxes collected are added to the treasury and can be spent later. 
The amount of taxes collected from trade maybe increased by Taxmen, another type of 
Specialist. The amount of taxes brought in by trade maybe increased by a Marketplace 
or Bank. 

Science: The knowledge that results from science research is shown as light bulbs. Each 
new technology that you direct your scientists to discover requires the investment of a certain 
amount of research. When enough light bulbs of research have been spent, the new advance 
is acquired by your civilization. The Library and University improvements plus some of the 
Wonders of the World increase the amount of research a city does. In addition, research may 
be increased by another type of Specialist, Scientists. 

Corruption: Depending on your type of government and the city’s distance from your 
palace, some trade may be lost as corruption. Corruption is marked by a modified trade 
symbol after a break in the trade line. (On the IBM, the trade symbol has a dark shadow.) The 
farther your city from the city containing your Palace (your capital) the more corruption and 
lost trade. Building a Courthouse improvement in the city reduces corruption. 


Population Roster 


The population of your city is shown by a row of people 
City Population in the population roster. Each person represents one popula- 
/ tion point. In addition to normal workers, the city may 
include three different types of Specialist, discussed below. 
The normal people who work in city map areas are 
shown as either happy, content, or unhappy. You must 
manage your city’s production and improvements so that at 
2 least a balance of happy and unhappy people is maintained. 
Entertainers (Specialists) If the number of unhappy people exceeds the number of 
happy people (with content people being ignored in this case) 
your city goes into civil disorder (see page 66). 


71 


72 


Looking at the population roster is a quick way to see how the balance of happy and 
unhappy citizens stands. When a city is about to increase in size, it maybe useful to adjust the 
work force so that the city is not thrown in to disorder by the increase. You can examine the 
population rosters of all of your cities at one time by consulting your Attitude Advisor from 
the Advisor menu. 


People takenoff the work force and removed from the city rnap become Specialists. These 


Specialists people no longer directly contribute to the food, resources, and trade the city generates. 


Mathematics 
(Alphabet & Masonry) 


Catapult Unit 








However, they may be useful in adjusting the amount of luxuries, taxes, and science the city 
generates. If your city is producing sufficient food, you maybe able to afford Specialists and 
their special abilities. Specialists do require food like other people. 

There are three types of Specialists. Entertained are musicians and other artists 
who provide luxuries for your city and their presence makes more people happy. Taxmen 
are bureaucrats who make the city government, specifically tax collection, more 
efficient. Scientists are researchers who increase the city’s contribution toward discovering 
new technology. 

Entertainers: People removed from the work force immediately become Entertained. 
Each Entertainer is the equivalent of two additional trade symbols added to that part of the 
city’s trade brought in as luxuries. This additional trade is added before the effects of 
improvements such as Marketplaces and Banks are calculated. Creating Entertainers has the 
result of creating more luxuries and making more happy people. 

Taxmen: You can change an Entertainer into a Taxman. (On the IBM, click the LMB on 
the Entertainer in the population roster. The Entertainer converts into a Taxman.) Each 
Taxman has a similar effect to that of an Entertainer, except that tax revenues are increased, 
not luxuries. When an Entertainer is converted, the luxury benefit stops working. 

Note that increasing taxes is only helpful if the city remains out of civil disorder. 
Otherwise, no collection is made. 

Scientists You can change a Taxman into a Scientist. (On the IBM, click the LMB on a 
Taxman and he is converted into a Scientist.) This Specialist is a researcher who increases the 
amount of knowledge your city is producing, just as Entertainers increase luxuries and 
Taxmen increase taxes. As with Taxmen, Scientists are only useful if your city is not in 
civil disorder. 

You can convert Taxmen back into Entertainers. 


= ee Into this box goes any surplus food generated by your city each turn. This is food to the 
Food Storage Box right of the break in the food line, if one appears, This food is not needed to feed the city’s 
population and the Settlers that it is supporting. Food put in the storage box is stored and 
accumulates each turn. When the box overflows, your city’s population grows by one point 
and anew citizen is added to the population roster. The storage box is emptied and begins to 
fill again next turn. 
If one of your sties is not currently producing enough food to feed its 
opulation, the people don’t starve so long as food is available for use in its 
Food Storage Box lees box. Each an any food shortage subtracted from food in the box. 
’ If the box is empty and the city still hasa food shortfall, onepoint of population 
FOOD STORAGE starvesand. disappears. 
JAAAAAAANANAARRE The Granary irnprovement has the effect of speeding poptdation growth. 
MAAAAAAAARAAAR AE When a city has a Granary, the storage box only half empties when it 
Tafafafafatatatatatatalatalata : 
JAAANAAAAAANNAL overflows and creates more people. The box empties only to the granary 
Bat line. In addition, a Granary protects the city from starvation during a 
apranag Famine disaster. 


Production Box 


Into this box go any surplus resources generated by your city each turn. 
Surplus resources are those not needed to maintain existing units and are 
shown to the right of the break in the resource line in the city resources 
window. Resources accumulate in the box until it fills, thereby completing the 
unit or improvement being built. 

The item being built is noted by its icon, if it is a unit, or its name if it is 
an improvement or Wonder. The items available for building depend on the 
technology your civilization has achieved at the moment. The size of the 
production box grows or shrinks, depending on the number of resources 
required to build each item. You may change the item being built during any 
turn before it is completed. You may also speed the completion of an item by 
paying for a rush job. 

Change Production: Use the Change button to open the menu of items 
that you can produce. (On the IBM, click the LMB on the button.) Then make 
your selection from the menu of choices that appears. The production box 
changes size to indicate the resource cost of your selection and the name or the 
icon of the new item appears at the top of the box. 

If you are producing an item that is no longer available from the menu, 
that production continues even after the item is completed. However, if you 
open the production menu while producing an obsolete item, you must make 
a new choice as the old one disappears. 


Production Box 





73 


Improvements Roster 


74 


Improvements Roster 





If you are building a Wonder and another civilization completes it before you can, you 
must change the production of your city. You are taken to you city’s display in order to make 
the production change. 

Rush Jobs: Youmay rush completion of a partially built item by paying to complete it 
immediately. To rush completion, use the Buy button at the top right of the box. (On the IBM, 
click the LMB on the button.) A menu appears showing how much money is required to finish 
the object by the end of the turn. Choose whether to rush the item or not. To speed the 
completion of an item in this manner costs at least $2 per missing resource. If no resources have 
gone into an item, i.e., the production box is empty, the cost of a rush job is doubled. 

Items completed by rush jobs are available at the beginning of your next turn, so there 
is no advantage for rushing items that would complete next turn anyway. To judge whether 
an item can be completed next turn without rushing, compare the surplus resources the city 
is generating to the number needed to finish. For very expensive items, it may be useful to 
consult your city status advisor for an exact count of the remaining cost. 

Sabotage: Enemy Diplomats may slip into your cities and destroy items partially 
completed. All resources currently invested in an item are destroyed and production starts 
over. Your only protection from this is to destroy enemy Diplomats before they can enter. 

Disaster: Pirate raids also destroy the partially completed item in the production box. 
The only defense against them is building the Barracks improvement. 


In this part of the city display is a list of the improvements and Wonders of the World that 
this city has built and that still exist. Items are listed one to a line and for each there is the item’s 
icon, its name and a sell button. 

Improvements and Wonders are discussed in detail in 
the separate manual sections Improvements, page 78, and 
Wonders of the World, page 82. In addition, all improve- 
ments and Wonders are listed in the Civilopedia. 

When a new improvement is built, it is added to the roster. 

Improvements may be destroyed in a number of ways, 
and when this happens, they are removed from the roster. 
Improvements are also removed when sold. 

You may sell an improvement to raise cash by pressing 
the sell button next to its name. See Selling Improvements, 
page 78, for more information. Wonders of the World may 
not be sold. 


The units now on the map anywhere in the world that are supported by this city are 


Home City Roster 


shown here. These units are normallv ones that this city has built, but it is possible to reassign 


units to another city. When a unit built elsewhere is assigned to another city, it is added to the 
second city’s home city roster and removed from the roster of the first city. 

Also noted here are any resources or food required by the unit for maintenance. 
The amount of resource and food support units need depends on your civilization’s type 


of government. 














Home City Roster 





Food Support 


Information Window 













Info Button Happy Button Map Button 





Units gS INF | Happy evap’, VIEW — View 
Defending a Ie — Button 
cy AGA 














Pollution 


Indicators (FF l¥| 
MINSK +3 
Trade 


Routes 


Units requiring resource maintenance are marked with a resource 
symbol below their icon. Resources needed for maintenance are unavailable 
for production and are shown to the left of any break in the resource line in the 
city resources window. If the city does not generate enough resources to 
maintain all of the units in the home city roster, units left unsupported are 
destroyed, beginning with the unit farthest from the city. 

Settlers that require food support are marked with the number of food 
symbols they require. 

Under two government types, the Republic and Democracy, each sup 
ported unit not in the home city causes one or more population point to 
become unhappy. These units are marked with special symbol to note that 
they are the source of some unhappiness. 





Information Window 


Within this window various types of information can be 
reviewed or accessed. Here you can quickly see what military 
units are defending the city, what trade routes the city has 
established, whether the city is causing pollution, a small 
version of the world map, or a bird’s-eye view of the city. 

Across the top of the window are several buttons Info, 
Happy, View, Map. Using these buttons you can call up the 
information you wish to see. (On the IBM, click the LMB on 
the button to call up information.) The button currently on is 
shown in a different color (white on the IBM). 


75 


Map: Pressing this button calls up a small version of the world map. The city you are in 
is marked for reference. (On the IBM, the city is a white dot.) Also marked on the map are the 
location of any cities with which you have established trade routes (shown as light green dots) 
and the location of units that make this their home city (light grey dots). The map maybe useful 
for planning additional trade routes, assessing the danger of enemies, locating units you wish 
to disband, or deciding a sailing direction for newly launched ships. 

View: This button opens the bird’s-eye view of the city that is seen when a new 
improvement or Wonder is built. As time passes, note that the architecture of the various 
dwellings improves. 

Info: This button calls up the most useful information. When you first open any city 
display, this button is automatically on. 

Just below the row of buttons are shown the icons for all units currently in the city. 
Fortified units have a border around them and units on sentry duty are shown as faded icons. 
Fortified units or those on sentry duty may only be activated from this window. (On the IBM, 
click the LMB on the unit.) When you return to the map display, these units can now be 
given orders. 

At the bottom of the window is a list of any trade routes the city has established. Each 
trade route is noted by the name of the city with which you are trading and the amount of trade 
generated. This trade is automatically included in the trade your city is generating, shown in 
the city resources window of the display. 

As your civilization moves into the In- 
dustrial Age, pollution may become a prob- 
lem. In the middle of this window, pollution 
indicators appear when the city's industry 
gets sufficiently large. The indicators are 
smokestack icons. (See Industrial Pollution, 
Effect of Luxuries page 52.) 

The presence of several smoke stacks is a 


Population Happiness Chart 


Oe 
PEPE RHE : = Fane Before Modification 


“2k Ee Be pemen cue that you need to reduce pollution or be 
TE RRR = - fr i mie prepared to clean it up. The alternative is 
— ¥ 7 eventual environmental disaster. There can 
bint ne ak itt <4 ~~ Effect of Wonders be up to one hundred smokestacks present, 


indicating a 100% probability of pollution 
each turn. 





76 


Happy: This button opens the Population Happiness Chart, which shows what factors 
are affecting the happiness of the city’s population. All people in a city beyond a certain 
number are unhappy before any modifying influences are taken into account. Atthe Emperor 
level of difficulty, only the first two people are content; at King level, the first three; and so on 
down to Chieftain level, where the first six people are content. 

When the city’s population increases beyond these minimums, the new people are 
unhappy unless their condition is improved by a culture and standard of living that provides 
luxuries, religion, and entertainment; they are coerced into contentment by martial law; or the 
presence of Wonders of the World lifts their pride and spirits. 

Thetop row of thechart shows the happiness of the population before taking intoaccount 
any of the factors that improve happiness. 

The second row shows the effects of the luxuries that are provided to the city, ifany. Two 
units of luxuries make one content person happy or one unhappy person content. A contented 
person is made happy before another unhappy person is made content. 

The third row shows the effects of Temples, Cathedrals, and Colosseums. These 
improvements have the effect of making unhappy people content. 

The fourth row shows the effects of martial law and military service. Under all 
governments except the Republic and Democracy, each military unit in a city coerces one 
unhappy person into contentment. Any units imposing martial law are shown in this row. 
Under the Republic or Democracy, martial law does not work. Instead, each military unit not 
in its home city makes one or more persons unhappy. This is shown by “sad face” symbols 
in this row and under the units in the home city roster. 

The fifth row shows the effects of any Wonders of the World, either in this city or 
elsewhere, thatareinfluencing the population’s happiness. Forexample,J.S. Bach’s Cathedral 
decreases the number of unhappy people by two. 

Specialists are content people, and are taken from the ranks of the content or happy 
= population when created. The effect of theincreased luxuries created by Entertainersis shown 
Medicine in row two. 

(Philosophy & Trade) The bottom row of the chart shows the cumulative effect of all factors on the happiness 
of the population. The status shown in this row is the same as that in the population roster at 
the top of the display. 

Examining this chart is useful for understanding what is affecting the happiness of the 
city and perhaps indicating what else could be done if the city is out of balance. You may see 
where creating Entertainers, disbanding out of town units, bringing in more units, or building 
a new improvement can bring the city back into order. 








Shakespeare's 
re] Theater 


77 


78 


Metallurgy 
(Gunpowder & University) 


me 


Cannon Unit 





CITY IMPROVEMENTS 


City improvements are the commercial, bureaucratic, educational, and public works 
infrastructure that make large and efficient cities possible. The potential size of a city is limited 
by inadequate provision of these facilities. The dense population of New York is made 
possible by the subway system. Los Angeles is located in a desert and brings much of its water 
from sources hundreds of miles away. 

In Civilization, irnprovements are also critical to the growth and irnportance of cities. Each 
of the improvements available provides some service or otherwise makes the city work 
more efficiently. 

When beginning anew civilization, you normally may only build one type of improvem- 
ent, the Barracks. As your civilization acquires new technologies, more improvements 
become possible. Each city may only build one of each improvement. The improvements that 
your city possesses are listed in the improvements roster on the city display. Once built, 
improvements (but not Wonders) may be destroyed by sabotage, disaster, and capture, and 
may even be sold for cash. 

Sabotage: Diplomats may enter a city and attempt industrial sabotage. This may result 
in the destruction of an existing improvement. The only defense against this type of attack is 
destroying the Diplomat before it can enter the city. 

Disaster: Volcanos, Pirate Raids, Floods, Fires, and Earthquakes may destroy improv~ 
ments in a city. There is no defense against Earthquakes, but Aqueducts prevent Fires, 
Temples prevent Volcanos, City Walls prevent Floods, and Barracks prevent Pirate Raids. 

Capture: Some, all, or none of a city’s improvements may be destroyed when it is 
captured by another civilization. When a city is completely destroyed, all improvements are 
destroyed as well. 

Selling Improvements: You may sell an existing improvement to raise cash by pressing 
the sell button next to its name in the improvements roster of the city display, (For the IBM, 
click the LMB on the button.) An option menu appears showing how much cash you would 
receive for selling, which is $1 per resource invested. Choose whether to sell or not. If you sell, 
the improvement disappears from the city and the money is added to your treasury. 

Selling improvements may be useful when you are short of money and threatened with 
the random sale of an improvement. It may also be useful when you are under attack with no 
reasonable chance of defending or recovering a city. By selling off its improvements, you 
reduce its value to the enemy and salvage something. You may sell one improvement per turn. 

An alphabetical list of improvements follows, including the benefit of the improvement 
and the technology that makes it possible. 

Aqueduct: Cities without an Aqueduct may not grow beyond a size of 10 population points. In 
addition, Aqueducts prevent the disasters of Fire and Plague. Aqueducts require the advance of 
Construction, cost 120 resources to build, and cost $2 per turn to maintain. 





Monarchy 
(Ceremonial Burial & 
Code of Laws) 





Bank: Banks increase the luxuries and taxes generated by a city by 50%. They require the 
advance of Banking and the city must already have a Marketplace improvement. The bonus 
from a Bank is added to that of an existing Marketplace and then applied. This bonus takes 
effect after all other considerations, including trade routes. Banks cost 120 resources to build 
and $3 per turn to maintain. 

Barracks: New units built in this city are already veterans, increasing their attack and defense 
factors by 50%. Barracks prevent the disaster of pirates. No technology is required to build 
Barracks. However, all existing Barracks become obsolete and disappear when you acquire 
the advances of Gunpowder and Combustion. Second generation Barracks cost $1 per turn 
to maintain and third generation Barracks cost $2 per turn to maintain. 

Cathedral: A Cathedral makes four unhappy people content and is very useful for keeping a large 
city out of civil disorder. Itrequires the advance of Religion, costs 160 resources to build, and costs 
$3 per turn to maintain. The effect of all Cathedrals in your cities is increased if you possess 
Michelangelo’s Chapel, a medieval Wonder of the World. 

City Walls: City Walls triple the strength of a defending unit, except when attacked bya Bomber 
or Artillery unit. This tripling occurs after considering the effect of terrain and veteran status. Cities 
defended by City Walls do not suffer population losses when a defending unit is destroyed. Walls also 
prevent the disaster of Flood. They require the advance of Masonry, cost 120 resources to build, 
and cost $2 per turn to maintain. 

Colosseum: The Colosseum is a large stadium for holding athletic contests and other 
events drawing crowds. Its presence makes 3 unhappy people content. It requires the advance of 
Construction, costs 100 resources to build, and costs $4 per turn to maintain. 

Courthouse: This improvement reduces corruption in a city by 50%. It requires the advance 
of the Code of Laws, costs 80 resources to build, and costs $1 per turn to maintain. 

Factory: A Factory increases the amount of resources generated by a city by 50%. A Factory 
becomes obsolete and stops working if a Manufacturing Plant 1s built in the same city. A 
Factory requires the advance of Industrialization, costs 200 resources to build, and costs $4 per 
turn to maintain. The effect of a Factory may be increased by the presence of a Hydro Plant, 
a Nuclear Plant, or a Power Plant. It may also be increased by the Hoover Dam, a modern 
Wonder of the World. 

Granary: Cities possessing a Granary use up only 50% of their stored food to create new 
population. The storage box only half empties. In addition, the Granary prevents a Famine disaster 
from destroying population. The Granary requires the advance of Pottery, costs 60 resources to 
build, and costs $1 per turn to maintain. 


79 


80 


Mysticism 
(Ceremonial Burial) 





Hydro Plant: The production bonus for a Factory or Manufacturing Plant is doubled if the city 
has a Hydro plant. In addition, a Hydro Plant reduces the probability of pollution. A HydroPlantmay 
only be built by a city on or near a River, Hills, or Mountains. It requires the advance of 
Electronics, costs 240 resources to build, and costs $4 per turn to maintain. 

Library:A Library increases the knowledge production of a city by 50%. It requires the advance 
of Writing, costs 80 resources to build, and costs $1 to maintain. The effect of all Libraries 
in your cities is increased if you possess Isaac Newton’s College, a medieval Wonder of 
the World. 

Manufacturing Plant: This improvement increases the resources generated by a city by 100%. 
It requires the advance of Robotics, costs 320 resources to build, and costs $6 to maintain. Its 
presence makes an aleady existing Factory obsolete and the Factory ceases to work. The effect 
of a Manufacturing Plant maybe increased by the presence of the Hydro Plant, the Nuclear 
Plant, the Power Plant, or the Hoover Dam. 

Marketplace: A market place increases tax revenue and luxuries by 50%. The Marketplace 
becomes available with the advance of Currency, costs 80 resources to build, and costs $1 per 
turn to maintain. 

Mass Transit: In cities with Mass Transit, the population has no effect on pollution. Otherwise, 
when a civilization has acquired the Automobile advance, the population of its cities increases 
the probability of pollution. Mass Transit requires the advance of Mass Production, costs 160 
resources to build, and costs $4 to maintain. 

Nuclear Plant: Like other types of power plants, the NuclearPlant increases the production 
of a Factory or Manufacturing Plant by another 50%. A Nuclear Plant also reduces the day-to-day 
probability pollution. However, a Nuclear Plant in a city suffering civil disorder risks a nuclear 
meltdown (see page 54). The Nuclear Plant requires the advance of Nuclear Power, costs 160 
resources to build, and costs $2 per turn to maintain. 

Palace: Thisistheadministrativeandgovernmentalcenterof your civilization. The farther 
any city is from the city containing the Palace, the more corruption is likely. You may build anew 
Palace in another city, but this causes the retirement of the first Palace and relocation of the 
government. If your Palace is destroyed, a new one may be built in any existing city. ThePalace 
requires the advance of Masonry and costs 200 resources to build. Your Palace costs nothing 
to maintain. 


and costs $4 per turn to maintain. 
Recycling Center: The recycling center reduces the probability of pollution by two-thirds. It 
requires the advance of Recycling, costs 200 resources to build, and costs $2 to maintain. 


SDI Defense: The SDI (Strategic Defense Initiative) Defense protects the city from Nuclear 
units. Attacks by these weapons have no effect. This improvement becomes available with the 
Superconductor advance. The SDI Defense costs 200 resources to build and $4 to maintain. 

Temple: The Temple improvement becomes available with the Ceremonial Burial 
advance. Its presence makes one unhappy person content. With the additional advance of Mysticism, 
another person is made content by a Temple, for a total of two. A Temple prevents the Volcano disaster. 
Temples cost 40 resources to build and $1 to maintain. The effect of a Temple maybe doubled 
if your civilization possesses the Oracle, an ancient Wonder of the World. 

University: The presence of a University increases the knowledge generated by a city by 50%. A 
University may only be built in a city that already possesses a Library. The University bonus 
is added to the bonus from an existing Library. Together they double the knowledge 
generated. Universities become available with the advance of the University. They cost 160 
resources to build and $3 to maintain. The effect of all Universities in your cities is increased 
if you possess Isaac Newton's College, a medieval Wonder of the World. 


Navigation 
(Map Making & Astronomy) 


Sail Unit 


Magellan's 
Expedition 





81 


82 


Construction 


WONDERS OF THE WORLD 


As your civilization progresses through the years, certain advances make possible the 
building of Wonders of the World. There are 21 Wonders, 7 each for the three great epochs of 
civilization Antiquity, the Middle Ages (including the Renaissance), and the Industrial Age 
(present and future). These Wonders are the extraordinary monuments of a civilization, 
bringing everlasting glory and other benefits to their owners. 

A Wonder is a dramatic, awe-inspiring accomplishment. It is typically a great achieve- 
ment of engineering, science, or the arts, representing a milepost in the history of humankind. 
Each Wonder is unique, existing only in the city where it is constructed. 

In addition to the glory attached to owning a Wonder, each one has a specific, unique 
benefit. The people of your civilization are able to perform amazing feats, inspired by their 
pride in the possession of Wonders. For example, if your civilization possesses the Lighthouse, 
your ship units are able to move one additional map square per turn. 

The benefits of some Wonders apply only to the civilization that possesses them. If a 
Wonder you build is lost when one of your cities is captured, the powers of the Wonder then 
apply to the conquering civilization. The same holds true if you capture a Wonder. 

However, the benefits of the ancient Wonders and most of the Wonders of the Middle 
Ages may not stand for all tirne. Objects and accomplishments that awed the ancients may not 
similarly inspire the people of the Industrial Age. The achievement of later advances may end 
the benefits of older Wonders, regardless of whether your civilization or another makes the 
canceling advance. 


Each Wonder may be built once your civilization achieves a specific technology. For 
example, when your civilization acquires Map Making, you may begin construction of 
the Lighthouse. 

You may only build a Wonder if it does not already exist somewhere else in the world. 
If it exists in another city, it does not appear as an option in your production menus. If you are 
building a Wonder in one of your cities and the same Wonder is completed elsewhere before 
you finish, you cannot complete your construction. You must convert your production to 
something else. 

Wonders are not destroyed when an enemy occupies their city. However, if a city 
possessing a Wonder is destroyed, than that Wonder is lost forever and cannot be rebuilt. 

Wonders are built in the same manner as any other city improvement with one 
exception. You may move a Caravan into the city of construction and accept the option “help 
build Wonder.” AU of the resources that went into the Caravan are added to the construction 
of the Wonder. 

Wonders may be built in any city and more than one maybe built in the same city. 


Effects 


Antiquity 


Nuclear Fission 
(Atomic Theory & 
Mass Production) 





Each Wonder has specific and general benefits. An example of a specific benefit is 
increased movement of your ships when you possess the Lighthouse. 

General benefits are the glory that accrues to your civilisation for possessing the Wonder, 
even after new technology makes it obsolete. Each Wonder that your civilisation possesses 
adds to your civilization score. The presence of Wonders are significant when the top 5 cities 
in the world are measured. The presence of Wonders also influences the historians, such as 
Gibbon, who periodically rate the world’s civilizations. Finally, Wonders also influence the 
decision of the people to improve your palace. 


Colossus: The Colossus is a great bronze statue best riding the gates or harbor mouth of 
the city. This amazing statue draws tourists from around the world, greatly increasing the 
trade of the area. 

Trade is +1 in every city map square that is already generating some trade. The effect on tourism 
stops working after development of Electricity and the trade benefit is thereafter lost. The 
Colossus requires the advance of Bronze Working and takes 200 resources to build. 

Great Library: Begun as a hobby by a local ruler, the Great Library is an obsession for the 
city. Its agents scour the world for books and manuscripts, making the Great Library the 
largest knowledge repository in existence. 

The Great Library gives you any technology that two other civilizations have acquired. However, 
it stops working after development of the University. It requires the advance of Literacy and 
takes 300 resources to build. 

Great Wall: The Great Wall was built not so much to keep invaders out, but to retard their 
escape with any loot. The effect is to deter the aggressiveness of neighbors. 

When you possess the Great Wall, other civilizations always offer peace during negotiations. 
However, the effect of the Great Wall ceases after development of Gunpowder. It requires the 
Masonry advance and takes 300 resources to build. 

Hanging Gardens: The magnificent Hanging Gardens are a great marriage of engineer- 
ing and beauty. Architecturally brilliant layered tiers of gardens are ingeniously supplied 
with water. Any visitor is overwhelmed by the grace of this man-made garden of paradise. 

Possessing this beautiful monument brings great pleasure to the people of your civilization and 
results in +1 happy citizen in each of your cities. This magical effect of the Hanging Gardens expires 
with the development of Invention because, thereafter, the gadgetry of the garden design 
becomes cheaply available to everyone. 

Knowledge of the Hanging Gardens is acquired with the advance of Pottery, and the 
Wonder takes 300 resources to build. 

Lighthouse: The construction of this immense Lighthouse not only creates the greatest 
navigational aid of antiquity, but triggers a birth of seafaring skills and traditions. The result 
is great achievements by your ships and captains. 


83 


The Middle Ages 


Possession of the Lighthouse increases sea movement rates by 1 square for all of your ships. 
However, the effect of the Lighthouse ceases working after development of Magnetism, anew 
navigational aid that puts competent sailing within the grasp of anyone. The Lighthouse 
requires the advance of Map Making and it takes 200 resources to build. 

Oracle: Building the Oracle gives the beliefs of your civilization a unifying central dogma 
that increases its effect on the people. The auguries of the Oracle are transmitted through the 
local Temples, exerting significant control over their lives. 

The Oracle becomes available with the advance of Mysticism and doubles the effect of your Tempkes 
in making unhappy people content. It stops working after the development of Religion, which 
appeals more widely to the growing literate, intelligent citizenry. The Oracle takes 300 
resources to build. 

Pyramids: The Pyramids are the greatest and oldest of the ancient Wonders. Their 
construction requires great government control of the entire nation to make possible the effort 
of their construction. 

A civilization that possesses the Pyramids may change government type without going through 
a period of Anarchy. In addition, that civilization may select any type of new government, not just those 
for which it has made the correct advance. For example, the possessing nation may become a 
Democracy long before it acquires the technology of Democracy. 

The Pyramids require the advancement of Masonry and take 300 resources to build. 
However, the effects of the Pyramids expire after the advance of Communism is achieved. 


Copernicus’s Observatory: Working alone on cold nights in the tower of his cathedral, 
this Polish priest re-established that the Sun was the center of the Solar System, not the Earth. 
This fact had been recognized by ancient astronomers but lost in the Dark Ages, buried under 
superstition and religious dogma. Copernicus’s findings were controversial but proven true, 
and were an important step in the rebirth of Western science. 

Building Copernicus’s Observatory doubles knowledge production in the city, after all adjust- 
ments for Libraries, Universities and Scientists. However, this benefit stops working after 
development of the Automobile. The advance of Astronomy makes the Observatory possible. 
It costs 300 resources to build. 

Darwin's Voyage: Partially from the research accomplished on his scientific voyage 
aboard the Beagle to the Galapagos Islands, Charles Darwin developed the theory of evolution 
that was published in his masterwork, The Origin of Species. Darwin’s arguments, and those 
of his contemporary, Alfred Russell Wallace, were so convincing that they were only disputed 
on philosophical grounds, mainly by religious fundamentalists. The theory of organic 
evolution was the foundation of all following research in biology. 

The civilization that builds Damwin's Voyage immediately acquires two civdization advances.The 
advance of Railroads makes Darwin’s Voyage possible. The Voyage costs 300 resources. 


Nuclear Power 
(Electronics & 
Nuclear Fission) 


Nuclear Plant 





Isaac Newton’s College: Considered by many to be the greatest scientist of all time, 
Newton developed theories of universal gravitation that explained both the motion of 
heavenly bodies and the falling of bodies to Earth. He also wrote important works on calculus, 
optics, the spectrum of light, fluid mechanics, the motion of comets, and the motion of tides, 
and built the first reflecting telescope. For 32 years he was a professor of mathematics at 
Cambridge University. 

Possessing Newton's College increases the knowledge benefit of all your Libraries and Universi- 
ties. It maybe built once you have acquired the Theory of Gravity, but stops working after 
development of Nuclear Fission. The College requires 400 resources to build. 

J. S. Bach’s Cathedral: Johann Sebastian Bach was one of the great composers of the 
Western world. Born into a family of distinguished musicians, he was noted as a virtuoso 
performer during his life, but has become much more revered since his passing for the genius 
of his music. The majority of his compositions were written while serving the church, and most 
pieces were written for the organ and dedicated to the glory of his God. 

Possessing Bach's Cathedral decreases unhappy citizens on the same continent by 2 per city. The 
Cathedral may be built following the advance of Religion and costs 400 resources. The power 
of Bach’s music does not expire. 

Magellan’s Expedition:Ferdinand Magellan, a Portugese navigator, led the first expe- 
dition that circumnavigated the globe. Sponsored by Charles I of Spain, he was searching for 
a westward route to the spice islands of the Moluccas. Along the way he discovered the straits 
at Cape Horn that bear his name. Unfortunately, he died in the Philippines fighting natives. 
Only one of his five origina Iships and few of his men reached home, but the expedition proved 
that the Earth was round. 

Possessing Magellan's Expedition increases sea movement rates by 1 square for all of your ships. 
The expedition becomes possible after the advance of Navigation and never expires. It costs 
400 resources to build. 

Michelangelo’s Chapel: Michelangelo Buonarroti was perhaps the greatest of the 
Renaissance sculptors and painters. Working for the church in Rome and the Medici family 
in Florence, he is best known for his sculpture of David and the painting of the Sistine Chapel. 
He is renowned for the beauty of his work and the influence it had on succeeding generations. 

You may build the Chapel after achieving the advance of Religion. Possessing it increases 
the benefits of Cathedrals throughout your civilization until the advance of Communism diminishes the 
strength of Religion. The Chapel takes 300 resources to build. 


85 


86 


Industrial Age 


Philosophy 
(Mysticism & Literacy) 





Shakespeare’s Theatre: William Shakespeare, an English dramatist and poet, is consid- 
ered the greatest of all playwrights. Little is known of his life and he seems not to have become 
rich or famous in his own day. But not long after his death his fame began to grow and his 
influence on the English language has increased with the renown of his plays, which are still 
performed regularly around the globe. 

The Theatre maybe built after achieving the advance of Medicine. Thereafter, all unhappy 
people in the city are content, until the advance of Electronics makes the Theatre obsolete. It costs 400 
resources to build. 


Apollo Program: The culmination of the space race of the 1960s, the Apollo Program put 
several manned expeditions onto the Moon. Quickly overcoming many difficulties and 
dangers, the Apollo Program was one of the great technological achievements of the age. Its 
success promises that humankind may not be restricted just to Earth, but may eventually 
expand into space. 

The Apollo Program may be built after achieving the advance of Space Flight. It allows 
construction of space ships by any civilization having the technology to build parts. The Apollo 
Program costs 600 resources to build. 

Cure for Cancer: Of the diseases that continue to plague humankind, cancer remains 
one of the most feared and deadly. Despite huge efforts to find a cure for this malady, it 
continues to reap its toll each year. The developing science of genetic engineering offers new 
hope for a cure. 

After the development of the advance of Genetic Engineering, you may work on the Cure 
for Cancer. Possessing the Cure creates +1 happy citizen in all cities of your civilization. The Cure 
for Cancer costs 600 resources. 

Hoover Dam: Huge hydroelectric power sources were first developed in the United 
States during the 1930s and have since been built throughout the world. Converting the kinetic 
energy of falling water into electric power has proven to be a relatively cheap and environmen- 
tally sound method of generating electricity. 

The Hoover Dam may be built after the advance of Electronics is acquired. The Dam 
provides electric power to all cities on the same continent, increasing the resources generated by the city 
by 50%. In addition, the Dam reduces the probability of pollution from these cities.The Hoover Dam 
costs 600 resources to build. 

Manhattan Project: The Manhattan Project was the code name for the theoretical and 
practical development of atomic weapons. Once completed, the world’s future immediately 
was in doubt because the weapons it made possible threatened extinction for all life on Earth. 
But these weapons also offered an umbrella of peace due to their destructiveness. Massive 
global war became obsolete because all participants were doomed, win or lose. 

Now, surviving the Nuclear Age and environmental poisoning are the two greatest 
challenges of industrial civilization. 





Once any civilization completes the Manhattan Project, all civilizations in the world may begin 
building nuclear weapons, if they have the proper technology. The Manhattan Project itself maybe 
built once the advance of Nuclear Fission has been achieved. The Project costs 600 resources 
to build. 

SETI Program: The search for extra-terrestrial intelligence is a research effort set up to 
find an answer for one of humankind’s most nagging questions: Are we the only intelligent 
life in the universe? Being the first civilization to contact other intelligent life brings great glory 
and perhaps technological advantages. 

The SETI Program may be built when your civilization acquires the advance of 
Computers. Thereafter, the knowledge generated by your cities is increased by 50%, unless the 
Program is destroyed or captured by a rival. The SETI Program costs 600 resources to complete. 

Women’s Suffrage: A phenomena of the cultural, philosophical, and Social changes that 
followed the Industrial Revolution has been a steadily increasing respect for the rights and 
abilities of women. Women demanded and won the franchise of the vote, first in Western 
Democracies, after demonstrating their ability to perform well almost any job while the men 
were off to war. This symbolic freeing from historic social hierarchies has led to increasing 
practical freedom, at least in the West. 

Women’s Suffrage becomes available after the advance of Mass Production. Under a 
Republic or Democracy, units away from their home city create one less unhappy citizen than normal 
for a civilization that possesses Women’s Suffrage. It costs 600 resources to achieve. 

United Nations: The United Nations is an international organization that meets to solve 
international problems through diplomacy. Its goal is world peace and security. It offers 
a forum for debate and also works to aid the economic and technical development of 
poorer nations. 

Building the United Nations is a great achievement by a civilization. It is available after 
the advance of Communism. During negotiations with other civilizations, they alwuys offer to make 
peace with you. This allows at least a temporary resolution to all wars you are engaged in. The 
United Nations costs 600 resources to build. 


87 


DISASTERS 


Each game turn there is a chance that a disaster of some sort may strike one of your cities. 
A disaster may result in loss of population, destruction of a city improvement, or disruption 
of production. Some disasters may be prevented if your civilization has acquired certain 
advances or if the city has built a certain improvement. In these cases, the disaster does not 
occur or has no effect. 

The possible disasters are described below. For each there is an explanation of why it 
occurs (if a reason exists), the effect on your city when it strikes, and what measures can 
prevent it, if any. 

Earthquake: Earthquakes may strike any city that is built adjacent to Hills terrain. There 
is nothing that you can build or learn to prevent this disaster. An earthquake destroys one 
city improvement. 

Famine: Famine strikes randomly. It can be prevented by building a Granary improvem- 
ent. If it strikes a city with no Granary, all food in the food storage box is lost and the city’s 
population is reduced. 

Fire: Fire can hit any city at any time. It can be prevented by building an Aqueduct 
improvement. Fire destroys one city improvement. 

Flood: Flood can strike any city built next to or on a River square. It can be prevented by 
building a City Walls improvement. Flood reduces city population. 

Piracy: Pirate raids may strike any city built adjacent to an Ocean square. Pirates can be 
prevented by building a Barracks improvement. Pirates remove all food from the food storage 
box and destroy whatever is being built in the production box. All resources spent so far in 
production are lost. 

Plague: Plague may strike any city at any time. It can be prevented by acquiring the 
advance of Medicine or by building an Aqueduct improvement. Plague reduces the city’s 
Plastics population. 

(Refining & Space Flight) Volcano: A volcano may erupt and damage any city built adjacent to or on Mountain 
terrain. The effects of a volcano may be negated by building a Temple improvement in the city. 
Volcanic eruptions reduce the city’s population unless negated. 


“ee Spaceship 
pg Component 





88 





4. THE DYNAMICS OF 


CIVILIZATION 





INTRODUCTION 


Historian Will Durant describes four necessary elements of civilization economic 
provision (food, shelter, and clothing), political organization (government), moral traditions, 
and the pursuit of knowledge and the arts. A society possessing these four elements is a 
civilization; a society lacking one or more remains primitive. 

Economic provision, the first of these elements, is the most important. Steady and 
relatively abundant food supplies mean permanent living places are possible. Time is 
available for thinking and making improvements better tools, better homes, better agricul- 
tural techniques, useful new inventions, art, music, etc. The result, over time, is a gradual, 
albeit fitful, increasing diversity in culture and knowledge. 

Good food-producing areas bring unprecedented human populations together, and this 
aggregation creates a need for government. Governments provide the necessary decision- 
making process. As villages grow into towns and then into cities, more and more decisions 
are required. If the decision process does not work, hostility or disaster might tear apart 
the group. 

Moral traditions provide a code of behavior that allows the group to stay together while 
minimizing friction between members. The code tells everyone how to act and what to expect 
from others. It is a set of rules for living in harmony regulating marriages, setting sexual 
mores, defining vices, etc. Handed down generation after generation, the rules become 
second nature. 

The moral tradition of most civilizations includes a religion. The great religions that have 
survived through the ages are those that offered reasonable moral traditions for living. 
Religions that failed often preached an inharmonious or destructive tradition. In some cases, 
a significant factor in the failure of a civilization was a flawed religion. 

Granary The pursuit of knowledge is a function of the spare time made possible by efficient food 
Se Hanging production, language, inventiveness, and incentives. The degree of inventiveness in any 

a9 Gardens society depends greatly upon the incentive of rewards. A society that rewards new ideas, and 

encourages them, generally benefits; a society that discourages them risks stagnation. 





91 


Railroad 
(Steam Engine & 
Bridge Building) 





A tightly structured and inflexible society maybe very unreceptive to new ideas. Strict 
religious beliefs have hampered the development of many civilizations and continue to do so. 
The great ancient library of Alexandria, an immense storehouse of ancient knowledge, was 
destroyed by religious fanatics, The loss of the information in this library contributed to the 
length of the Dark Ages. The apparent collapse of many communistic societies today is in part 
due to their failure to develop and accept new ideas. 

Societies that reward new ideas with riches, fame, and power encourage debate, thought, 
and invention. This may lead to a flowering of philosophy, science, and commerce. Inventive- 
ness is characteristic of the strongest and most influential civilizations. Examples of this are 
the philosophy and science of the classical Greeks, the engineering of the Roman Republic, 
and the commerce of the Italian city-states during the Renaissance. 

The pursuit of the arts is the final element of civilization, and again, the definition of how 
art is determined to be civilized or not remains unclear. Durant defines art as the creation of 
beauty. But beauty is a relative thing. What is beautiful to primitive man maybe repulsive or 
plain to a modern gallery-goer, and vice versa. 

To some extent, civilized art maybe considered art for beauty’s sake, an expression of 
thought or feeling that brings delight. In primitive art, the sense of beauty is a secondary 
characteristic. Primitive art first has a usefulness, like another tool, and performs a function. 
Adornment of the body, music, and dances help attract a mate. Primitive art also may serve 
a role in religion, enhancing the plea for good harvests, hunting, healthy babies, rainfall, relief 
from disease, etc. 

The presence of these four elements together in a society define it as constituting 
civilization: economic provision, political organization, moral traditions, and the pursuit of 
knowledge and the arts. A society that lacks one or more never quite becomes civilized. A 
society that loses one or moreover time falls back into a primitive state and disappears as a 
civilization. Through humankind’s history many such civilizations have come and gone. 


Recycling 
(Mass Production & 
Democracy) 


Recycling Center 








THE ADVANCE OF KNOWLEDGE 


The major dynamic of change throughout the history of civilization has been the 
continuing advance and accumulation of knowledge. As humankind progressed by fits and 
starts through the ages, civilizations rose and fell, to a large degree depending on the 
knowledge that they acquired and how they employed it. 

Those that first acquired new knowledge were often able to employ it to build a more 
powerful position. But there are many cases of civilizations that obtained some new 
technology first and then failed to use it to their advantage. The pac at which new knowledge 
was developed and implemented by a society depended on many factors, including its social 
organization, economic organization, geographic location, leadership, and competition. 

The concept of progress being not only inevitable, but also a good thing is a relatively 
recent phenomenon. Only in the last several hundred years have we actively studied history 
and considered the evidence of the historical record. For most of human history the pace of 
progress was so slow as to be barely detectable. But since the Industrial Revolution, the pace 
of advance and change has dramatically increased. Rapid change is now considered normal. 
For much of the world, new discoveries are continually expected and are not a surprise. 

There are those who would argue that the advance of knowledge is not necessarily a good 
thing. At various times in history some societies attempted to put a stop to progress. Inmost 
cases this decision was made by a few people in the leadership who thought they knew what 
was best for everyone. History shows that individuals continually attempting to improve 
their lives cannot be prevented from invention, and this in turn has made change inevitable. 

It is clear that some invention occurs by accident. A string of idle thoughts may lead to 
a new conclusion, or an accidental mix-up in the chemistry lab may result in a useful new 
compound. But invention occurs much more commonly in response to a need. 

When civilization began and humans started living in cities, a host of new problems 
arose. The search for solutions to these problems resulted in an accelerating pace of discovery 
of new ideas and inventions. A need triggered the search for new knowledge, and the new 
ideas created, in turn, new needs. 

The advance of knowledge has been a continually evolving process, with each new idea 
leading to new possibilities. We can examine the progress of human societies as a series of 
changes and adjustments brought about by the never-ending search for improvement. The 
result of this dynamic process has been ever-expanding human populations, a generally 
improved standard of living, and a greater understanding of the world around us. 


93 


The singular technological achievement that was the prerequisite of civilization was the 
agricultural revolution. Humans changed from food gatherers and hunters to farmers and 
herders over several thousand years. Food supplies became more abundant and dependable. 
People began to congregate in cities central to their fields, specialize their skills, and employ 
free time to invent and ponder new ideas. 


Farming created an increased need for food storage containers, especially in areas where 
Antiquity crops were seasonal. Over a long period, experimentation with clay, the firing of clay, and 
eventually the potter’s wheel, developed the technology of POTTERY and ceramics. This 
made the storage of food surpluses possible, and improved cooking and diet. The standard 
of living and life expectancy dramatically improved. 
Critical to the progress of the new city dwellers was the invention of the ALPHABET 
and WRITING, considered by many to be the advance that marks the state of being civilized. 
Alphabets appear to have derived from symbols for sounds, concepts, and hand signals. 
Writing came about due to the need to pass on thoughts without talking or save them 
without memorization. 

Symbols developed into the earliest scripts and hiero- 
glyphics, pressed into clay tablets, carved into stone, and 
painted upon objects. The invention of written records meant 
that all previous knowledge did not have to be carried in the 
memory of the society and passed on orally. Knowledge 
could be stored and consulted later. From that point on the 
accumulation of knowledge accelerated. 

The growth of the first cities and the establishment of 
permanent structures led to experimentation with various 
building materials, Humans learned to build with brick and 
stone, employing mortar to cement the individual pieces 
into a solid structure. This skill of MASONRY became 
even more important when walls were needed around cities 
for protection. 

In those cities that grew large and wealthy, the demand 
rose for even more magnificent structures such as temples, 
palaces, and city gates. Also needed were more sophisticated 
defensive fortifications, aqueducts for water supplies, and 
harbor facilities. This created a need for more sophisticated 
techniques of CONSTRUCTION. 





The waterwheel, critical to early agriculture 


94 


As empires expanded, they were connected by roads such as the Royal Road of the 
Persian Empire that extended from Susa to Sardis. This road, and the even more impressive 
network built later by the Remans, were huge projects. In order to be completed they required 
the invention of new designs for BRIDGE BUILDING. Roads and bridges built by the Remans 
still stand in many parts of the world and some remain in use. 

Inside the first cities, people mingled and interacted on an unprecedented scale. This 
caused new problems that could not be met by old tribal standards of behavior. A Babylonian 
king, Hammurabi, is credited with the earliest surviving CODE OF LAWS that spelled 
out acceptable rules for making complaints, obtaining redress, and meting out justice. 
The code explained what behavior was unacceptable and set punishments designed to 
encourage compliance. Law was a needed complement to government, preventing anarchy 


It was possible in prehistonc times to find relatively pure 
gold and silver lying exposed in the ground. Working with 
these soft metals led to experimentation with natural copper 
that also could be found. Eventually, our ancestors discov- 
ered how to smelt the green copper ores into copper metal. 
However, copper was not common, it was brittle, and it was 
too soft to hold an edge. Although copper was much superior 
to stone and made beautiful objects, it had only limited uses. 

The ancient smelters continued experiments, trying com- 
binations of copper with other metals. They were looking for 
a cheap metal that would make superior weapons and tools. 
When copper was alloyed with tin, the result was BRONZE, 
a much more useful metal. Some early conquerors extended 
their empires through the technological superiority of their 
bronze weapons. But bronze was still not available in large 
quantities, due to the scarcity of ‘copper and tin. 

Experimentation continued, and after many years, the 
secret of IRON WORKING was discovered. Some people 
believe that iron was the critical technology for the rise of 
civilization because it was easily found, harder than bronze, 
x : a rh and could hold abetter edge. It not only made superior and 
Temple of Athena on the Parthenon, Athens cheaper weapons, but also much cheaper and better tools. 





95 





The Hittites are thought to be one of the earliest societies to extensively develop iron 
working. They used iron weapons to conquer Asia Minor, and spread into the Middle East 
and Africa. For a brief period they held sway over a large empire due to this technological 
superiority. But they could not prevent others from acquiring the secrets of iron, especially 
their neighbors, the Assyrians. 

The Assyrians were a remarkably brutal society that subjugated their empire by mass 
murder and enslavement on an unprecedented scale. Their military successes resulted not 
only from their acquisition of iron working, but also their independent development of the 
WHEEL. Although it had obvious peaceful uses for moving loads in carts, the Assyrians used 
the wheel to build chariots of war. They conquered Mesopotamia and Asia Minor, destroying 
the Hittites along the way. 

In turn, the Assyrians fell when oppressed subject peoples turned the chariots around 
and overthrew their masters. The Assyrians had built their empire on the advantage of their 
chariots, but their brutal social organization created too much unrest to survive. 

The earliest concepts of reverence for divine beings or 
supernatural powers must have been attempts by humans to 
make some sense of the great mysteries of life and the 
universe that surrounded them. Possessing barely a fraction 
of the knowledge that we do today, a divine explanation was 
needed to compensate for their utter ignorance of what forces 
controlled the Sun, the seasons, natural disasters, diseases, 
birth, and death. 

The earliest societies developed rites of worship in 
attempts to communicate with and influence supernatural 
forces thought to beat work. Symbolic of these early rites was 
the CEREMONIAL BURIAL that prepared the dead for their 
voyage into the afterlife. 

These rites of worship became ever more elaborate, 
paralleling the increasing sophistication of society. Typical of 
this sophistication was the development of MYSTICISM, 
whereby elite priests were attributed supernatural powers 
such as the ability to heal the sick and foretell the future. The 
Oracle of Delphi was such a mystic, examining entrails for 
portents of the future. For thousands of years kings and 
peasants alike were believers, conducting their lives 


An aqueduct, typically superb Roman engineering according to the wisdom of mystics. 


96 


The most common early form of government was a despotism where one person held 
absolute power. This proved inadequate for many societies, especially those that established 
rule over a greater area than one person could control. In answer to this problem there arose 
a class of local rulers who in turn owed allegiance to the one overall ruler. The top person 
became the king of the MONARCHY and his power was delegated to his local representatives. 

The class of aristocrats and governors that came into existence as the monarchy evolved 
had an incentive to make their fiefdoms productive because they normally kept profits in 
excess of those owed the king as taxes. At the same time, they acted as a check on the wilder 
schemes of the king who required their assistance when instituting policy. Monarchies 
continued to evolve for thousands of years, resulting in living conditions generally improved 
over despotism. 

There is some evidence that writing was actually first used as to keep an accounting of 
commerce and taxes. Regardless of whether letters or numbers came first, societies 
that developed writing also understood the concept of numbers, addition, and subtraction. 
The need then arose for more useful systems of calculation for architecture, ship design, 
and science. 

This specialized branch of study became MATHEMAT- 
ICS, advanced most brilliantly by the Greeks according to the 
historical evidence. Their work was used by the famous 
Roman engineers of antiquity and preserved by the Muslims 
during the Dark Ages. The Muslims continued to build on the 
Greek work and developed the numerals used today inmost 
of the world. As the Dark Ages came to an end, the ancient 
math of the Greeks and others was recovered by the West 
from the Muslims. 

As cities and empires grew, and the economic relation- 
ships between the providers and consumers grew more 
complicated, there arose a need for what we now know as 
money. The primary functions of money were to be a medium 
of exchange, a storehouse of value, and a standard of value. 
Prior to its existence all trade and exchange was done by 
bartering. The first CURRENCY is attributed to King Croesus 

= eer IE x | , : of Lydia who made coins of electrum, a naturally occurring 
As P j $7 TON BXS/AEA cp} alloy of gold and silver found abundantly in his kingdom. 
ee When the Persians, a newly risen despotism that replaced the 


AZAR ITQNTENP2 10 A ZYTENA oY Assyrians, conquered Lydia, they retained the use of 


currency. Thereafter, it spread rapidly around the world. 





The Rosetta stone, deciphered by Champollion 


97 





Longboat of Viking raiders 


98 


The exchange of goods and services had been going on for ages in the tribes of prehistoric 
humans. This barter flourished within the new cities as some people specialized in food 
production, and others in building, toolmaking, pottery making, etc. After the development 
of money, TRADE between civilizations grew in volume and intricacy. 

Because of variances in climate, geography, or resources, people in different parts of the 
world often held a comparative advantage in the production or accumulation of certain 
goods. By exchanging with each other, two people could end up with more than if they relied 
on their own industry. An additional benefit of trade was the dissemination of new ideas 
around the known world. 

The rise of classical ancient civilizations in China, Greece, Rome, and other places was 
due to a rapid increase in the economic strength of these societies. The Han dynasty of China 
established control over a very fertile area that prospered with little outside interference. The 
Greek city-states prospered by establishing colonies around the Mediterranean and compet- 
ing vigorously with each other. The Remans drew their economic power from fertile lands, 
a relatively free citizenry, and military an epee 

All of the classic civilizations were characterized by unprecedented wealth spread over 
more people. This resulted in a flowering of the arts and sciences, patronized by the newly rich 
class of merchants and 1 bureaucrats-competing with each other for prestige. Another 
way to distinguish themselves from the peasants was 
through LITERACY. The ability to read and write was a mark 
of eminence. 

The spread of literacy accelerated for a time the pace of 
the advance of knowledge. The literate intelligentsia had the 
time and interest to ponder all manner of topics, especially the 
great mysteries of life and the universe that had been trou- 
bling Man for eons. From debates, examinations, and rudi- 
mentary experiments, the Greeks of this period founded the 
study of PHILOSOPHY, passed down to us in the preserved 
works of Plato, Aristotle, Socrates, and others. 

The philosophical and scientific studies of the Greeks set 
off a fireworks display of ideas. This shower of thought lit up 
new vistas for consideration. They studied the natural world, 
and began debunking the fables of the mystics and finding 
answers. Putting a high reverence on life, their curiosity and 
experimentation developed into the first scientific study of 
the body, disease, and MEDICINE. They combined science 
with the practical knowledge of herbs and other treatments 
handed down over the ages. 


Refining 
(Chemistry & 
The Corporation) 


Ea Power Plant 





Turning their eyes to the heavens they correctly deduced that the Earth revolved around 
the Sun. This and other discoveries were the beginnings of ASTRONOMY, a science that 
evolved from mystical observations of astrology. These early understandings of the heavens 
led to practical uses. Sailors of antiquity had been forced to sail by dead reckoning or stay close 
to shore following MAPS. Astronomy and experience revealed useful patterns of star 
placement and movement that could be used as aids for NAVIGATION. 

The studies of the Greeks also led them to create a new form of government, the 
DEMOCRACY, that seemed best suited for encouraging economic and personal freedom. But 
their democracy applied only to the elite males, not to the peasants, slaves, or to women. 

Greek economic and military power eventually declined, expended in wasteful wars. 
They were overwhelmed by the military power of the Remans to the west and the promise 
of their burgeoning of science and knowledge remained unfilled for over a thousand years 

Roman society was much less elitist than the Greeks, at least at first, and the people were 
more practical than contemplative. The Remans absorbed the science and mathematics of the 
Greeks, and employed them in famous works of ENGINEERING. The Remans are consid- 
ered the great engineers of antiquity, building roads, bridges, aqueducts, fortifications, 
harbors, and other structures wherever they went. The West did not see the like again for 
many centuries after their collapse. 

Early Roman society was based on a new type of social organization where the land was 
owned by many, not just a few aristocrats. This policy resulted in a strong economy. In 
addition, the citizens were the army, and their training, tactics, leadership, and morale made 
them a nearly invincible force. These were all new ideas and required a new form of 
government. In response, and drawing on the ideas of the Greeks, the Remans developed 
the REPUBLIC. 

Under this government, the large land-owning class chose representatives to rule for 
them in a new parliamentary body, the Senate. In turn, the Senate chose the ultimate leaders 
of government and the generals of the armies. For centuries the republic functioned very well, 
stimulating economic production, meeting all military crises, and eventually dominating 
most of the Mediterranean basin. 

The rule of the Roman Republic was usurped by a series of leaders who installed 
themselves as emperors. From this point on the empire began to falter, shored up occasionally 
by an able leader. The land-holding citizenry disappeared, bought out by rich generals and 
others. The Senate became corrupt and ineffectual. The economy became increasingly reliant 
on slave labor and the citizen army was replaced by mercenaries. 

After four hundred years of decline, the western half of the empire fell to barbarian 
invaders. The eastern half carried on for another thousand years before succumbing to 
the Muslims. 


99 





An early cannon 


100 


THE MIDDLE AGES 


In Asia, the Chinese successfully held off the barbarians for many years, partly due to 
their Great Wall. Their civilization offers many interesting contrasts to those of the West. 
Chinese society was managed by the Mandarins, a class of bureaucrats. They strictly followed 
a conservative orthodoxy derived from the philosophy of Confucius that emphasized 
personal virtue, devotion to family, and justice. 

As practical managers, they studied science and technology, and encouraged INVEN- 
TION, but only because they thought it was important for their emperor to have this 
knowledge available. They are credited with a number of important advances including 
paper, the printing press, MAGNETISM, and GUNPOWDER, but did very little with them. 
In their view, the society that they maintained according to Confucian principles approached 
perfection and there was no need for these new inventions. 

So Chinese society continued to discover interesting things, only to have them exist 
mostly as curiosities. They actively discouraged change and advance, sealing themselves off 
from the rest of the world. At one point they sailed a mighty fleet of ocean-going ships past 
India to Africa, but after discovering nothing new of interest, 
the emperor forbade further ocean voyages and the fleet was beached to rot. 


The Chinese civilization continued like this for many 
centuries after the fall of the Romans, but eventually fell 
victim to fierce Mongol armies from the north that the Wall 
could not hold off. But the Mongol conquerors were absorbed 
by the Chinese culture and the ossifying influence of the 
traditional orthodoxy continued to dominate the culture. 
When the West arose from the Dark Ages, it quickly eclipsed 
the power of the ultra-conservative East. 

While Confucianism dominated China, the philosophi- 
cal studies stimulated by the Greeks exposed flaws in the 
mysticism and cults that had dominated spiritual matters in 
the West. Many new beliefs sprang up to fill the void, and 
among these were the beginnings of the RELIGIONS which 
dominate spiritual life today. These new creeds made it 
possible for people to find fulfillment and peace within an 
increasingly complicated, crowded, and demanding world. 











Gutenberg’s printing press 


With the fall of the Roman Empire, Europe fell into a Dark Age dominated at first by the 
barbarian conquerors. The Chinese isolated themselves, the Byzantine and the Muslims 
fought for the Middle East, and the rest of the world struggled with their own first attempts 
at civilization. 

The barbarian possession of Europe ruined economic production, disintegrated the 
governmental infrastructure and laws, and decimated populations. For hundreds of years the 
whole region returned to a barbaric, primitive existence. 

Strongmen established local rule and the ablest began building larger kingdoms. The 
local baron provided protection, law, and order for the people that were his effective slaves. 
He held his fiefdom by the permission of the king, and owed the king taxes and service in 
payment. This brand of monarchy became known as FEUDALISM. 

As the degree of order grew and populations recovered, the strands of knowledge were 
gradually regathered. Some of this knowledge had been preserved by the Church, and some 
was obtained from outside Europe. 

Improving economic conditions made the upper class wealthy. The social climate called 
for a new code of behavior to distinguish the aristocrats from the tiresome laborers and 
merchants. The elite became knights, directed by a code of CHIVALRY. Departing radically 
from the barbaric past, the warrior was expect to protect the 
weak, prevent evil, and follow the teachings of the Church. 

The revival of Europe was a gradual process, powered 
by increasing economic production. Trade flourished at fairs 
and overseas, towns grew, guilds of tradesmen improved 
skills, and crude industry started. The quest for knowledge 
was again stimulated, partly by tantalizing information drift- 
ing in from China and Arabia, and partly by debates over 
Church dogmas. In an effort to benefit from the new knowl- 
edge, kings established the first UNIVERSITIES. 

University scholars expanded the scope of their studies 
and began considering the same problems that had en- 
grossed the Greeks far in the past. The attempts of alchemists 
to turn base metals into gold resulted in the science of 
CHEMISTRY. This new science led to improvements in 
industry, munitions, and medicine. Other experirnents began 
revealing the secrets of matter and motion, the natural laws 
that controlled how things worked. The study of astronomy 
led to PHYSICS. 





101 


Michelangelo’s sculpture 
of David 


102 





Sketchy accounts of marvels witnessed in China drifted over the trade routes to the 
universities and merchants of Europe. These accounts led to experimentation in attempts to 
duplicate the inventions reported from the East. Most important of these was the fabled 
exploding powder. 

The Chinese “were mainly content to use GUNPOWDER for fireworks, but the small 
states of European were continually embroiled in wars and were looking for any possible 
technological advantage. An explosive power promised military advantage if it could be 
harnessed. While the discoveryof gunpowder was occurring, new developrnents in the study 
of metals and manufacturing became the science of METALLURGY. The marriage of 
gunpowder with cast bronze and iron tubes created cannon. 

The development of cannons and muskets was a major revolution in warfare. The search 
for a way to end the dominance of the battlefield by armored cavalry was over. Relatively 
cheap musketeers could shoot down the expensive cavalry at a very profitable rate. Armed 
with the new weapons, the Europeans ended the threats of the Muslims and Mongols, and 
began extending their own empires around the world. 

At a time when Europe was beginning to expand overseas and searching for trade routes 
to Asia, there was a strong need for better tools for navigation. One answer was another 
invention of the Chinese that eventually reached the West MAGNETISM, important in the 
compass. Mastery of the compass made ocean sailing much safer, and led to more voyages of 
discovery and a greater understanding of global geography. 

The beginning of the modem world is associated with the Renaissance, a flowering of 
trade, science, and the arts that occurred in the city-states of northern Italy roughly a thousand 
years after the fall of the Roman Empire. The cities competed with each other in commercial 
enterprises, mainly trade with the eastern end of the Mediterranean. 

As with the Greek city-states of antiquity, competition and relative freedom fostered 
rapid economic growth. As their economic empires grew, it became increasingly clear that 
there was a desperate need for capital to fund trading ventures. In response to this need, they 
developed a number ploys that eventually led to BANKING. They had to be devious because 
the loaning of money at interest had been considered a source of evil for centuries and was 
proscribed by the Church. 

The development of banking by the city-states further enhanced their economic position. 
One benefit of this increasing wealth was the patronizing of the arts and sciences by families 
such as the Medici. We have this era to thank for Donatello, Michelangelo, Galileo, Leonardo 
Da Vinci, and many others. 

Isaac Newton, perhaps the greatest scientist of all time, tied together years of consider- 
ation of the laws of nature during a summer sojourn from his plague-threatened university. 
His treatise on the THEORY OF GRAVITY satisfactorily explained the motion of the planets 
as well as why objects fell to Earth, and was the take-off point for most science for the next 
several hundred years. Newton is also credited equally brilliant works on light, optics, and 
calculus, any one of which would have made him famous. 


THE INDUSTRIAL AGE 


Within a generation of Newton’s death, the Industrial Revolution took off in England. At 
the time, England possessed one of the strongest and most rapidly growing economies in the 
world. The population was relatively well educated, there were numerous small industries 
already in place, and the government was encouraging commerce. This was a fertile 
environment for invention. 

The spark of the revolution came from the need to pump water out of deep coal mines. 
Inventors tinkered with a number of mechanical methods of getting water out, but in the end 
the best solution was a crude STEAM ENGINE connected to a pump. The refinements of the 
early steam-powered pumps took a number of years, but resulted in an engine that could 
provide power from burning coal for any number of enterprises. 

The significance of the Industrial Revolution was that the production of a single worker 
could be dramatically increased by machines. The new machines were powered first by coal 
and later by other energy sources. They were no longer dependent on animal or water power. 
Machines could be placed nearly anywhere, even inside ships. 

Rapid economic growth accompanied the Industrial 
Revolution in England, resulting in dramatic increases in the 
production of textiles, iron, and other goods. This increased 
the need for an improved transportation system throughout 
the country. At first this need was met by the construction of 
a network of canals linking the country’s rivers. But inventors 
looked for better alternatives, and came up with the idea of 
RAILROADS powered by steam locomotives. 

Railroads spread quickly throughout Europe and North 
America, and eventually reached the comers of the world. 
They were important not only because they speeded up 
communication and delivery of goods, but they in turn 
triggered innovation as inventors continually searched for 
ways to make them more efficient. 

The ability of railroads to haul great loads of raw mate- 
trials and finished goods made it possible for the new indus- 
trial managers to consider even larger manufacturing enter- 
prises. It soon became apparent that INDUSTRIALIZATION 
meant low costs due to the economies of large-scale produc- 
tion. Large factories and mills sprang up around the world as 
more and more countries industrialized. 





Spanish caravel, the ship of discovery 


103 





Watt’s steam engine 


104 


The new industries and the railroads were great construction projects and they created 
the demand for stronger and cheaper building materials. Railroad bridges, rails, factory 
buildings, and city skyscrapers were limited by the strength and durability of iron. The answer 
was the development of STEEL, a nearly perfect building material that eventually could be 
made quite cheaply. 

Industrialization accelerated the advance of knowledge. The great fortunes that could 
accrue to the innovator encouraged new invention. The advance of physics, chemistry, 
mathematics, and engineering offered new tools for experiments. Laboratories were created 
solely for research. 

One major goal of this research was the search for alternative ways to generate and 
transmit power. While the steam engine was revolutionary, every factory had to have its own. 
More useful would be a central power generating station that sent out energy to users. 

The phenomena of lightning offered a clue. The properties of ELECTRICITY were 
discovered by Michael Faraday, a British chernist and physicist. He invented ways to generate 
electricity, to transmit it, and to employ it as an energy source to power machines. His 
inventions transformed the daily lives of much of the Earth’s population, improving working 
conditions, bringing labor-saving devices into the home, and creating the opportunity for a 
wide range of new inventions. 

Railroads, steel mills, power companies, and other busi- 
nesses grew to tremendous size and new ways of organizing 
these commercial enterprises had to be found. The huge 
investments required could not be financed by a few people. 
In response to this need there developed the CORPORA- 
TION, an economic entity that raised investment capital by 
selling shares of ownership to a great many small investors. 

Inventors began looking for alternatives to coal as a 
sources of energy. Coal was bulky and burned dirty. An 
alternative was especially desirable for those areas and 
nations that possessed no coal. One solution was oil, a 
messy nuisance that had been laying around for millions of 
years. With the development of REFINING, oil was 
transformed into a variety of fuels that had different 
characteristics and uses. 





The electric light bulb 


A new round of experimentation followed, searching for an engine that could take 
advantage of the explosive properties of gasoline, a refined product of oil. The result of this 
experimentation was the internal COMBUSTION engine that converted the energy of 
gasoline and similar fuels into horsepower. Oil fuels were less bulky and burned more cleanly 
than coal, and set off a wave of new industries that built machines employing internal 
combustion engines. 

Following the success of the railroad, people experimented with a number of ideas for 
machines that would move over land. They were looking for something to replace horse- 
drawn vehicles that were crowding the growing metropolitan areas. Steam-driven vehicles 
showed some promise, but the answer was the AUTOMOBILE, powered by the new internal 
combustion engine. The automobile became the greatest consumer good to date, and also 
revolutionized warfare when modified into armored land battleships called tanks. 

The internal combustion engine was also the answer to one of humankind oldest and 
most cherished quests to fly. Experimentation with flying had been going on for many years, 
first in balloons, then gliders, and with various attempts at human powered flight. The 
new engine was light enough and sufficiently powerful to make flying possible. The first 
powered FLIGHT was accomplished by the Wright brothers, and improvements in engines 
and aircraft design followed rapidly. 

The laboratories and classrooms became the center of 
invention as the technological complexity of experimentation 
grew. The thinking of physicists built on the work of Newton 
and again revolutionized our understanding of the universe. 
With the aid of marvelous new machines to aid research, the 
search for the building blocks of matter resulted in ATOMIC 
THEORY, the description of atoms and molecules. 

Scientists and industrialists alike continued studying 
electricity and developed many new uses for ELECTRON- 
ICS. Experimentation led to the telegraph, telephone, 
recorded sounds, radio, and television, and many other 
electronic gadgets that were useful in the home and 
for industry. 








105 





Wright Brother’s Kitty Hawk 


106 


Manufacturing became a science itself. Industrialists continually looked for ways to 
speed production, improve quality, cut costs. Early ideas had been the specialization of labor 
where one person did one job over and over, becoming expert at it. Another innovation was 
precisely made interchangeable parts. Henry Ford is credited with developing MASS 
PRODUCTION with the installation of the assembly line in his automobile factories. 
Production of machines and consumer goods soared. 

The dramatic changes of the Industrial Age did not benefit everyone equally. The 
capitalists grew wealthy while the standard of factory workers often deteriorated. Govern- 
ments that were not flexible enough to evolve to meet the demands of the new age were 
violently overthrown. The philosophers proposed new organizations for society that 
appealed to the working class, including socialism and COMMUNISM. 

The communism of Marx and others was to be a worker's paradise. There was to be no 
social hierarchy, and the means of production and subsistence would be owned by all. The 
people of many nations, both industrial and agrarian, overthrew obsolete and unresponsive 
monarchies, and installed communist governments. 

Nearly a century of experimentation with communism proved that its lofty goals could 
not be reached. The surrender of personal and economic freedom to the state resulted in lower 
standards of living, not greater, and a new class structure of privileged party members 
replaced the old. Some technical advance was possible, but 
cool lacs a only at great cost. Communism was unable to compete with 
: the free-market democracies in either technical advances or 
general happiness. 

In the more flexible societies, the industrial workers 
were not able to gain control of the entire government, but 
they were able to improve their lot. In this period of rapid 
change, society was unprepared for the unrest that inequi- 
table distribution of wealth caused. Although eventually a 
number of steps were taken to improve this condition, the 
workers themselves took matters into their own hands. 

Striving for a greater voice in the affairs of their lives, 
industrial workers developed techniques of work stoppages, 
strikes, and boycotts. Eventually they formed LABOR 
UNIONS through which they could present a unified front in 
negotiations with managers and owners. The labor move- 
ment was the result of the greed and imperiousness of the rich 
industrialists. The unions brought an equilibrium between 
the two forces, though the balance was subject to swings in 
either direction. 





Henry Ford’s Model T 


The technical advances of the Industrial Revolution were partially spurred by the arms 
race. The industrial powers vied with each other for colonial empires and continental 
dominance. Each turned to its engineers and scientists for superior weapons to improve their’ 
diplomatic and military position. 

In the air, the arms race resulted in very rapid progress. In some of the larger conflicts, 
new aircraft designs were made obsolete in only a few months by the appearance of the next 
generation of aircraft. Jet engines, swept wings, helicopters, and aircraft earners were 
examples of ADVANCED FLIGHT systems. Additional pioneers worked on a new system 
of propulsion that could power unmanned aircraft, perhaps into space. The solution was 
ROCKETRY, developing into missile weapons and space launch vehicles. 

The design of the aircraft and other machines was limited in some cases by the 
construction materials available. This created a demand for replacements for wood and steel 
that retained their strength yet were lighter. Research discovered a range of new materials, 
prirnarily PLASTICS developed from petroleum. Plastics proved to be useful for a wide range 
of applications, and created opportunities for many new industries. They were especially 
valuable in space vehicles due to their unique properties. 

The increases in invention, production, and comrnuni- 
cation created the need for irnproved tools for record-keeping 
and calculation. Super-calculators were first considered early 
in the Industrial Age, but no practical model was built. 
Electronics offered a new opportunity and the first 
COMPUTERS were born to help codebreakers during war. 

Computers triggered an information revolution, that 
may yet prove as dramatic a break in human history as the 
previous agricultural and industrial revolutions. Calcula- 
tions that were previously impossible were finished in 
seconds. This made previously unthinkable research and 
precision now routine. Mountains of information were 
reduced to tiny chips of silicon, yet remained accessible. 

In the manufacturing plants, researchers continuedseek- 
ing ways to improve quality and reduce costs. The next stop 
in automation was the installation of complex ROBOTS that 
could endlessly repeat certain movements. This freed human 
workers from these numbing tasks. In addition, robots could 
work in environments that might be inhospitable to humans, 
such as space. 


107 





Nuclear detonation dust cloud 


108 


The search for the ultimate strategic weapon was undertaken by the United States. It was 
to be so powerful that it made war obsolete. A team of physicists, building on their knowledge 
of atomic theory, eventually discovered the technology of NUCLEAR FISSION. This made 
possible the construction of the first atomic weapons. With the spread of these weapons 
among the most powerful nations, the risk of world war decreased because it was clear there 
would be no winner after a nuclear exchange. 

The enormous energy output of nuclear fission suggested peaceful uses as well. 
Experimentation proved that electric power could be generated from nuclear reactions. At 
first thought to a great advance, NUCLEAR POWER was found to have certain risks attached 
that reduced its value. The fuel of the nuclear reactors was not only lethal, but the waste 
products required special handling. A number of disaster at nuclear power plants indicated 
that this energy source was much more difficult to harness than hoped. 

The race into space was born as much from international competition as from any interest 
in science. To the industrial powers, each major first in space meant prestige and was clear 
proof of the superiority of their society. After a number of spectacular successes and tragic 
failures, the world concluded that the benefits of SPACE FLIGHT would be slow incoming 
and costly to achieve. Once the competitions had run their course, the exploration and 
potential colonization of space settled down into a more scientific exercise. 

The Industrial. Revolution brought great change to 
civilization, but not all of it was beneficial. The burning of 
enormous quantities of coal and oil lowered the quality of the 
air humans breathed in many areas. In some cities, the people 
wore masks to filter the air they breathed. The great increases 
in production meant huge quantities of wastes had to be 
disposed of, and too much of it ended up in rivers and oceans. 
Unbridled industrial development risked global warming 
and the poisoning of the Earth’s air and water. 

The richer industrial nations took the lead in fighting 
pollution, putting restrictions on the dumping of wastes into 
rivers and the air. Cars were required to be cleaner. In many 
places a priority was placed on RECYCLING, by which 
paper, aluminum,glassand other waste products were saved 
from the dump and returned to manufacturers for re-use. By 
this practice, long in place in the steel industry, a percentage 
of new products consisted of recycled materials. 


The quest for new technology continues today. Scientists are doing research in a number 
of areas that could lead to dramatic advances that will impact future societies. 

One important area is GENETIC ENGINEERING. If humans can learn how to do this, 
we maybe able to prepare better animal stocks, better crops, cure diseases such as cancer, and 
eliminate genetic defects that cause retardation. While this research continues, so also does the 
debate on the ethics of genetic manipulation. Especially among religious groups, there are 
concerns about the appropriateness of such research. 

Scientists are also searching for a SUPERCONDUCTOR. If this material could be found 
it might also have dramatic effects in daily lives throughout the world. It is significant because 
a great deal of energy is lost when electricity is transmitted over distance. The superconductor 
would greatly minimize this loss of energy, resulting in great increases in efficiency and 
reduction of costs. 

Experimentation also continues in an effort to develop FUSION POWER, a potentially 
limitless energy source. Fusion of molecules of heavy water, a relatively cheap raw material, 
results in the release of tremendous energy in the form of heat. This heat could be converted 
into electricity. The development of fusion power would mean extraordinarily cheap electric 
power with almost no environmental risk. 

In retrospect, the advance of civilization seems to have 
been inevitable. Although at various times and places this 
advance was halted, or even went backwards, somewhere in 
the world progress continued. A more detailed examination 
of history can better explain why the process speeded up and 
slowed down, why certain civilizations advanced rapidly for 
a time and then declined. But it seems clear that the acquisi- 
tion of knowledge and its application was the major dynamic 
force of history. 





Silicon microprocessor computer chip 


109 





110 


CM ND) DIEU ONT NANO) § 5S 





LEADER BIOGRAPHIES 


The civilizations that oppose you are ruled by well-known figures from history. For 
example, if you encounter the Greeks, they are ruled by Alexander the Great. 

The strengths and weaknesses of the leader are reflected in how that person manages his 
or her civilization. Alexander, who conquered most of the known world in his time, maybe 
expected to be similarly aggressive if he appears as one of your rivals. Each rival leader in 
Civilisation is rated in three categories: Aggression, Development, and Militarism. Within each 
category there is a scale of behavior. The leader may be at one end or the other, or neutral. 

Aggression: This measures how likely the leader is to go to war with his neighbors. 
Aggressive leaders are likely to choose war even when involved in several wars already. 
Friendly leaders are likely to make peace even when not at war elsewhere. 


er Development: .Expansionist leaders are interested in expanding the size of their civiliza- 
Religion 7 tions and devote resources to building Settlers and sending them out to found new cities. 
(Philosophy & Writing) Perfectionist leaders, the other end of the scale, are more interested in building up individual 


cities and improving the terrain around them. While they do expand, they do so at a much less 
reduced rate than their opposites. 

Militarism: Militaristic leaders seek to acquire technology that leads to better weapons. 
Civilized leaders seek technologies that are most useful in improving their civilization 
economically and politically. 

You can learn about the personality of a leader of any civilization with which you have 
established an embassy from the report of your Intelligence Advisor. Press the Info button for 
the civilization and look under the leader’s name. Listed there are the personality character- 
GEM Cathedral istics of the leader. For any category that is not mentioned the leader is neutral. For example, 
re) JS. Bach's Cathedral Elizabeth I is listed only as Expansionist. That indicates she is neutral regarding Aggression 

cA and Militarism. Be aware that these personality traits are only tendencies and that all leaders 


re) Michelangelo's are capable of any type of action, depending on circumstances. 
Chapel 








111 





112 


Robotics 


(Plastics & Computers) 


ak Artillery Unit 
Se Mfg. Plant 


. id Spaceship Module 


The leaders and civilizations that you may encounter are listed below. For each there is 
a brief biographical note and a hint or two on what to expect if you encounter them. 

Abraham Lincoln (Americans): From humble beginnings, and largely self-taught, 
Lincoln rose to become one of America’s greatest Presidents. Directing the nation through the 
Civil War, his will, intellect, and political skill were critical for the survival of the fledgling 
democracy. Most often associated with the emancipation of slaves, the reunification of the 
country and the preservation of democracy are his lasting contributions. 

In Civilization, Abraham Lincoln and the Americans are most likely to become a 
democracy. While they look to expand, they are not overly aggressive. 

Alexander the Great (Greeks): Alexander inherited the throne of Macedonia in 336 B.C. 
and quickly gained control of all Greece. At the head of an allied Greek army, he set out on one 
of the greatest military campaigns of history. Within twelve years he had conquered the 
enormous Persian empire to the east, Egypt to the south, and the western part of modem India. 
Only the reluctance of his men to continue ended the conquests. He died prematurely of fever 
at the age of 33, but in this short span established hmself as one of the greatest generals of all tirne. 

If you encounter Alexander and the Greeks, they can be expected to expand aggressively. 

Elizabeth I (English): Queen of England for 45 years, she inherited a strife-tom, failing 
nation, and built it into a first-rate European power. Her main adversaries were the Spanish 
under Philip II, who went into a steady decline after the defeat of their Armada in 1588. 
Elizabeth was known for important domestic reforms as well as shrewd diplomatic and 
military maneuvers. Her reign was marked by a general flowering of the English economy 
and culture. She presided over the beginnings of the British empire, not quite living to see the 
establishment of English colonies in North America. 

Elizabeth is a formidable foe,aggressively expandingandcomptently growing at home. 

Genghis Khan (Mongols): After uniting the Mongol tribes, he conquered the Chin 
Empire of northern China by 1215. For the next nine years his armies moved westward, 
overrunning all in their path and reaching well into eastern Europe. The Mongol hordes were 
armies of mounted bowmen who were outstanding riders and marksmen. Their recurved 
bow design was technologically ahead of Western weapons, being both compact and 
powerful. From his capital at Karakorum, south of Lake Baikal, the Great Khan presided over 
one of the largest land empires of history. 

In Civilization, the Mongols can be expected to expand very aggressively at the expense 
of the development of individual cities. 

Hammurabi (Babylonians): King of Babylonia, he is most noted for his code of laws, one 
of the earliest known. His empire encompassed the eastern part of the Fertile Crescent, 
centered on the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers. A competent ruler and builder of civilization, his 
empire was eventually destroyed by raids from Asia Minor. 

The Babylonians are generally more concerned with building and growing, rather than 
continual expansion. 





Rocketry 
(Advanced Flight & 
Electronics) 





Nuclear Unit 





Julius Caesar(Romans): One of the more contraversial characters of history, Caesar was 
both a staunch defender of the people’s rights and unambitious politician who destroyed the 
Roman Republic. Certainly brilliant, among his other skills he was a superb general, 
conquering Gaul in a classic campaign that is still studied, invading Britain, and establishing 
himself as dictator for life after defeating Pompey in a civil war. Stabbed to death on the Ides 
of March (3/15) by friends and proteges who resented his grab for power, he nevertheless 
made the future Roman Empire possible. 

The Rornans are tough foes and can be expected to balance expansion, conquest, 
and development. 

Mahatma Gandhi (Indians): The father of Indian independence, he was a skilled 
politician and spiritual leader. His campaign of pa resistance wore down the British and 
after World War II he was an important part of the independence negotiations. He worked 
tirelessly for an end to the caste system in India and for peaceful co-existence between the two 
great religious groups of the nation, the Hindus and the Muslims. He was fatally shot by a 
Hindu fanatic while on a prayer vigil for peace. 

The Indians under Gandhi are not aggressively expansive and are more likely to develop 
the areas they can obtain peaceably. However, they are conscious of technology and can be 
a strong rival in a space race. 

Mao Tse-tung (Chinese): Considered the founder of the People’s Republic of China, he 
rose to power in the 1930s, leading the Long March and becoming head of the Chinese 
Communist party that eventually defeated the Nationalists. He led the new nation until 1958 
when he was replaced due to the failure of many programs, including the-Great Leap 
Forward, a plan to kick-start local industrial growth. He regained power after the disruption 
of the Cultural Revolution, a few-year period of unrest that he directed. 

The Chinese are generally concerned with building a strong civilization and don’t seek 
to expand aggressively. 

Montezuma (Aztecs): The Aztec emperor at the time of the Spanish conquest, he was a 
brutal despot who angered his subject peoples. Cortez took advantage of this unpopularity, 
enlisting the aid of 30,000 Indian allies for the march on the Aztec capital. Montezuma’s belief 
that the Spanish were the descendants of gods kept him from recognizing the danger and 
adequately preparing his formidable army. 

The Aztecs are fierce warriors and dangerous opponents. They are quite capable of 
competent military campaigns while simultaneously building a strong empire. 


113 


114 


Space Flight 
(Computers & Rocketry) 


a Spaceship Structural 


re) Apollo Program 





Napoleon (French): Through bold and decisive action, Napoleon rose quickly during the 
turmoil of the French Revolution. He became part of the ruling Consulate that resulted from 
a Paris coup and thereafter consolidated power, eventually having hirnself crowned emperor 
in 1804. For the next 11 years Europe suffered almost constant war. At its peak the French 
Empire stretched from Madrid to Moscow. An allied coalition completed the defeat of the 
French at Waterloo and forced Napoleon into a final exile. 

The French are conquerors and seek to expand. Perhaps not as dangerous as the Aztecs 
or Greeks, they are still a threat that must be watched. 

Rarnesses (Egyptians): Ramesses II ruled Egypt for 33 years after usurping the throne 
from his brother. Under his rule the empire blossomed, reaching from Syria to the fourth 
cataract of the Nile. He is noted for the splendor of the monuments, temples, and other 
buildings that he distributed liberally throughout the country. However, the rise of luxury, 
slavery, and mercenary armies during his reign fostered the indolence that led to the eventual 
decline of the Egyptian empire. 

The Egyptians are great builders. Under Ramesses they can be expected to construct 
mighty cities and can be a significant threat if allowed to expand over a large area. 

Shaka (Zulus): The first king of the Zulus, he united the tribal villages under his rule and 
forged the Zulu army. In a short period he conquered all nearby enemies and established 
Zululand. He and his descendants ruled uncontested until Europeans arrived on the border. 
Though the Zulus were without peer as individual warriors, they proved no match for 
well-led European armies with greatly superior weapons. 

The Zulus are fierce warriors and are not afraid to pick a fight. Be wary if you discover 
them next door. They are not fascinated by technology and you maybe able to gain a 
technological advantage over them. 

Stalin (Russians): A long-time Bolshevik, he emerged from the power struggle follow- 
ing Lenin’s death as the new leader of the Soviet Union, contrary to Lenin’s wishes. He quicldy 
implemented plans for the forced collectivization of agriculture, rapid industrialization, and 
a huge military buildup. These policies were made possible by a reign of state terror that led 
to millions of deaths. After repelling the Nazi invasion of World War II, which killed 20 million 
more Russians, he was able to establish a hegemony over most of Eastern Europe that lasted 
nearly half a century before disintegrating. 

Under Stalin, the Russians are a dangerous opponent. They are capable of aggressive 
expansion, but may fall behind in the development of sties and technology. 


Steam Engine 
(Physics & Invention) 


Tronclad Unit 





Sulayman (Turks): Sulayman I, known as The Magnificent, presided over the Ottoman 
Empire at its height. Continuing his father’s campaigns, reconquered most of Hungary in the 
Balkans and the island of Rhodes in the Mediterranean. Fighting mainly against Venice and 
the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V, he just failed to take Venice and Malta, and lost Tunis. 
He also conquered much of Persia and Arabia. He was noted for the extent of his reforms, his 
patronage of the arts, and the splendor of his rule. 

Under Sulayman, the Turks are very aggressive and a generally unpleasant neighbor. 
Keep a wary eye on them and don’t hesitate if they let down their guard. 


115 


Steel 
(Metallurgy & 
Industrialization) 


it Battleship Unit 





116 


PLAYERS’ NOTES 


It is recommended that new players start at the Chieftain level of difficulty. Move on to 
the higher levels after you have had some experience. The highest level of difficulty, Emperor 
level, is only for the most experienced players and those looking for a very tough challenge. 
Winning at this level is very difficult. 

First City: Your first critical decision when starting a new game is selecting the site of your 
first city. The sooner the site is selected, the sooner you can begin the growth of your 
civilization. You should be able to find a reasonable site within the first several game turns. 
If you take too long you may fall significantly behind your rivals. 

The best squares for placing a city are Grasslands that show the resource symbol, Plains, 
and River squares. However, only some River squares have resources. If you start a city on 
a River square that doesn’t, the city’s early development will be slowed. This means starting 
your first city on a River square is somewhat risky. 

City site selection is interesting at the start because you know so little about the 
surrounding area. If the immediate vicinity looks reasonable for a start, it is usually best to 
accept the site you start on. A reasonable area for a start would include a nearby river, special 
resources like the Horse or Game, or Grasslands that show the resource symbol. Remember 
that Jungles and Swamps can eventually be cleared and converted into productive terrain. 
Starting next to an Ocean is good for allowing future ship construction. 

A bad city area would include several Deserts and Mountains. while some Ocean, 
Forests, and Hills are desirable, too many of either restricts the growth potential of the city. 

Defense of First City: The experience of our play tests indicate that it is most useful to 
build two Militia units immediately with your first city. When the first one appears, move it 
into the four adjacent map squares to the North, East, South, and West to discover the terrain 
your city can develop. Use this first Militia unit to further explore the nearby area. When the 
second Militia unit appears, fortify it in the city for defense. 

A high priority thereafter, especially if you find or suspect nearby rivals, is to acquire 
Bronze Working so that at least one Phalanx unit can be put in the city for defense. Two 
Phalanxes are recommended for defense, especially in cities on the edge of your empire. 

Expansion After your first city is started and you are exploring nearby terrain, begin 
planning the placement of your next and future cities. Look for good sites sufficiently distant 
from your capital so that the overlap of areas that they can develop isminimized or prevented. 
This allows each to grow to its maximum. 


Superconductor 
(Plastics & Mass Production) 


SDI Defense 





Settlers are very important early on as they are needed to found new cities, build roads, 
and irrigate. Plains terrain is useful to irrigate under Despotism, and Grasslands and Rivers 
when you are about to change to a Monarchy. Most of your early cities should have a Settler 
in existence doing work of some kind. If it founds a new city, have the home city build another 
Settler. Granaries are very helpful for early cities because they allow them to produce more 
Settler units and still grow at a reasonable speed. 

It is generally useful to expand as fast you can. Keep producing Settler units and send 
them to good city sites that your military units have disovered. A side benefit of expansion is 
that you push back the wilderness from which barbarians can appear. 

Guns Versus Butter: Keep in mind that most of the great civilizations of history were 
built by military conquest, and that your rivals are going to be somewhat aggressive. You must 
be prepared at least for defense, if not conquest yourself. 

It is possible to succeed as a relatively peaceful builder, but you wil Ineed to build up your 
economy with extensive trade routes and stay ahead in technology to discourage attack. 
Advance your government to Monarchy and Democracy as soon as you can. 

Technology Priorities Keep the Civilization Advances Chart (found at the back of this 
manual) handy. Examine this chart before playing and have some plans for which advances 
you wish your scientists to pursue. As time passes, the direction of your technology research 
maybe adjusted according to strategic considerations. Each advance that can be studied at the 
start presents an opportunity and leads on to other useful knowledge. 

Pottery makes the Granary improvement available and this speeds the growth of cities. 
Bronze Working introduces the Phalanx unit, which is good for city defense. Horseback 
Riding introduces Cavalry, which is a good offensive unit and useful in exploration because 
of its movement factor of 2. The Wheel introduces the Chariot, an excellent offensive unit with 
an attack factor of 4 that is useful if a rival is found nearby. Ceremonial Burial, the Alphabet, 
and Code of Laws are useful to quickly develop a more effective govemment. 

If you find yourself on a small island or continent, acquiring Map Making will be useful 
because it allows construction of Triremes, the first ship units. If you are able to concentrate 
on economic development, acquiring Monarchy will allow you to change your government 
to one more favorable for growth. If war is likely, then the Wheel, Masonry (City Walls), 
and Mathematics (the Catapult) are useful. Writing introduces Diplomats, which are 
needed to establish embassies with rivals. Trade introduces the Caravan, which is 
economically important. 


117 


The Corporation 
(Banking & Industrialization) 





118 


Wonders of the World: As you get more experienced with managing a civilisation you 
will become more aware of how the various Wonders can be of benefit. Read through the 
descriptions of the Wonders and consider how each one maybe useful. Some have economic 
benefits, some aid your diplomacy, and some speed the acquisition of technology. Attempt 
to build those that best suit your strategy. Keep in mind that the benefits of most of the early 
Wonders eventually expire. 

Carefully consider when to build Wonders. There maybe times when a Wonder would 
be useful, but other things such as Settlers, Aqueducts, or City Walls are more valuable for 
growth or defense. Wonders take a long tirne and many resources to build. Once construction 
of a Wonder has started, finish it as soon as possible so that a rival doesn’t completest first. Take 
advantage of the ability of Caravans to contribute to the construction of a Wonder. 

Don’t forget that the benefits of many Wonders accrue to the civilization that possesses 
it. It maybe cheaper to capture an enemy city that has built a Wonder than to build it yourself. 

Changing Governments: The ability to judge the best times to make changes of 
government will come with experience. The type of government that is most useful at anyone 
time depends on your economic and strategic situation. Because changing governments 
throws you into anarchy and is thus costly, plan changes carefully. 

Despotism is most useful during wartime and expansion (founding new cities), but can 
restrict the advance of technology and growth (populations). Because most existing units do 
not require resource support, new units, improvements, and Wonders can be built relatively 
quickly. Settler units only require one food unit, so each city can still support one or two that 
can be used to found new cities, build roads, irrigate farmland, and mine resources. 

Once your cities have been spread out and are reaching a size of 7 or higher, consider 
switching to a Monarchy. This is most useful when you have irrigated Grasslands and Rivers 
because these areas now can produce 3 food units per square. This translates into faster growth 
and larger populations. This in turn generally means more trade, reasonable technology 
advance, greater resource production from mines, and more economic power. Although all 
units now require resource support, it is still very possible to conduct military campaigns. 

Communism is similar to Monarchy but maybe more useful later when your cities are 
larger. Because under Communism corruption stays at the same level regardless of the 
distance of cities from your capital, this government is useful for far-flung empires. 

As your cities get larger, it is harder to keep them happy. Also, with the passage of time, 
each advance takes longer to acquire. Switching to the Republic or Democracy maybe useful 
after your cities grow beyond 10 people because these governments substantially increase 
trade. The increased trade converts into more luxuries for making large populations happy, 
more taxes for maintaining city improvements, and more technology research. Democracy 
eliminates corruption, further increasing the benefits of trade. 


The Republic 
(Code of Laws & Literacy) 





The trade-off is that war is difficult to conduct as a Republic or Democracy because each 
unit away from its home city creates one unhappy citizen. This makes it very difficult to 
conduct large military campaigns. Democracy or the Republic may not be a good choice if you 
are fighting or planning a major war. 

War Versus Peace: Long and costly wars can significantly slow your growth, but wars 
can also be very useful for hampering rivals, capturing cities, and devastating enemy 
economies. Although war is often forced upon you, there will be many opportunities to make 
war as you choose. When to go to war depends on your strength, your enemy’s strength, the 
threat an enemy poses, the desire to contain an enemy’s expansion, and where you stand in 
technology. Prepare for war as much as you can before attacking, and attempt to achieve your 
goals quickly. 

A technological advantage is quite useful in war, but only if you have built the better units 
and brought them to bear. You may encounter rivals who have a lead in technology but have 
built only a few units. Because they have concentrated on advancing, they may not be 
prepared for war. Technological advantage is especially useful at sea, because having better 
units there makes it easier to sink enemy transports that are often loaded with additional units. 

If you are not prepared for war when an enemy appears on your frontier, it is often best 
to meet demands for technology or tribute, at least temporarily, so that you can move forces 
to the threatened area. Be wary of accepting large bribes to enter a war that you are not 
prepared for. 

Once you have established a strong economy and identified your major rivals, it is often 
useful to stay at war with them until they are destroyed or ruined, or peace is forced on you 
by your Senate. While at war, restrict the movement of enemy transport ships, sinking all you 
can. In addition, wage economic war by landing units to pillage irrigation and mines to slow 
enemy growth and production. 

It can be very difficult to capture cities that are well-defended behind City Walls. 
Diplomats sent into the city on a sabotage mission may get lucky and destroy the walls, 
making the attack easier. Also, Bomber and Artillery units ignore City Walls. Battleships and 
Bombers are useful for destroying defenders inside coastal cities that may thereafter be 
captured by invasion. 


119 





120 


A Strong Economy: As your civilization matures and your sties grow, it becomes 
increasingly more difficult to generate the money needed to maintain improvements and the 
luxuries the larger populations demand to stay happy. Large quantities of money and 
luxuries, as well as the scientific research that must continue, can be generated by large” 
amounts of trade, city improvements, and Specialists. 

The best way to improve the strength of your economy is to increase trade by establishing 
trade routes with large cities of other civilizations. You should attempt to establish the 
maximum three trade routes allowed for each of your larger (10+) cities. It is nearly 
impossible to build a strong economy without extensive trade routes. At the local level, 
you can put Ocean, Gem, or Gold Mine squares in development on a city map to increase 
trade. This normally means, however, that people are not at work elsewhere generating food 
and resources. 

City improvements are useful for increasing taxes (Marketplaces and Banks) and 
research (Libraries and Universities). Taxes may also be increased by Taxmen. Science may 
be increased by Scientists. 

Diplomats: New players may tend to over look these units but more experienced players 
will come to recognize their value. You should attempt to establish an embassy with each of 
your opponents as you encounter them. This is the major value of Diplomats. It will help you 
plan your diplomacy and strategy by revealing the power of rivals. Diplomats can also be 
useful for looking inside enemy cities that you may attack and for their other abilities 
described in the manual. 

Take every opportunity to destroy rival Diplomats. This can prevent the theft of 
technology or other unpleasantness. 


Theory of Gravity 
(Astronomy & University) 


Isaac Newton's 
College 





Variaible Strategies: You must be prepared to tailor the strategy of your civilization 
to circumstances that arise. The two major options are peaceful economic development 
versus militaristic expansion. From the moment play begins, you will be gathering more 
information that helps plan your strategy. Important factors to be considered are the size of 
the island or continent that you first settle, the proximity of rivals, their strength, and their 
technological development. 

If you begin isolated on a reasonably sized continent that can hold ten or so strong cities, 
then a strategy of economic development is promising. In this case look to change your 
government to Monarchy and then Democracy as soon as possible. If the continent is huge and 
inhabited by one or more rivals, then you must prepare for eventual war to ensure sufficient 
expansion. If you begin on a small island or continent, then prepare for expansion overseas. 

When several rivals are found on the same continent, attempt to carve out as much of the 
territory as you can. Use Militia units to screen off enemy units and rake peace with everyone, 
at least to start. Peace may allow you to trade for technology faster than you can otherwise 
obtain it. Establish embassies when you can and identify the neighbors you plan to destroy. 
Don’t bother establishing trade routes with weaker neighbors that you plan to conquer. 

When the time is right, attack and destroy one rival at a time. Be prepared ahead of time 
and attempt to end the war as soon as possible. 

The suggestions listed above cover only a few highlights of tactics and strategies that 
were developed while Civilization was designed and tested. As you play, expect to discover 
many additional stratagems that improve the success of your civilizations. 


121 


Trade 
(Currency & Code of Laws) 





22 


DESIGNERS’ NOTES 


The main inspiration for Civilization was the success and reception of Railroad Tycoon. We 
were very pleased with how Railroad Tycoon worked and began looking for a suitable topic 
to which we could apply some of its better concepts. Thinking back, we can’t recall now what 
triggered the idea of making the new game about the history of civilization, but once the topic 
arose, it quickly became obvious that it fit our specifications. 

The central concept to Civilisation was that it was to be a “god game’, casting the player 
as the hero and ruler of a civilization over the course of its history. In this role he would 
guide and build his civilization, watching it grow and expand, rise or fall. As play proceeded 
the player could see the results of his decisions unfold and success would hinge on his 
relative skill. 

We also wanted Civilization to require the decision maker to juggle several balls at once. 
We found in Railroad Tycoon that this helped keep the challenge and interest high. As Sid 
sketched out the basic design, he evolved the various hats the player would wear. 

Clearly he would be the military commander, moving his arrnies against rivals. A second 
role was that of economic planner. Wearing this hat, the player would plan the placement, 
growth, and production of cities. The player would have to decide between “guns or butter" 
producing military hardware or economic enhancements for his civilization. 

The player would also have to decide upon the direction of research for new knowledge. 
This again would often be a guns or butter decision, as some advances improved internal 
conditions and others made the military more potent. The player would have to judge which 
avenue of research was most useful at any onetime, and be prepared to change if conditions 
warranted it. 

As design work continued, additional player roles were added. He would have to 
conduct his own diplomacy. By keeping track of rivals through the reports of his advisors, the 
player would have to make judgments on whom to appease, whom to attack, whom to make 
friends, and whom to ignore. In addition, the management of each city was made more 
complex, forcing the player to spend more time to keep them efficient and stable. 

With all of these duties falling to the player, we felt that we had come up with a mix of 
interesting decisions that would keep the player challenged, and result in a game that was fun 
and addictive. 

Another major concept that we wanted to borrow from Railroad Tycoon was the 
variability of worlds that made every game different. This worked very well, as in the previous 
game, making the play fresh each time. 

We also decided early on to include the hidden map. We found that this contributed 
significantly to the fun and interest of play. Another feature that Sid developed was the 
Civilopedia, the on-line encyclopedia of game concepts. We thought this would especially 
help new players. 


University 
(Mathematics & Philosophy) 





Most of these game features were in place in a rough form by the end of the winter of 1990- 
1991. Thereafter work proceeded mainly by the trial and error process of coding, testing, 
reviewing, and re-coding. Through the spring and summer a new version appeared every 
day or so, and the design became more refined. We made adjustrnents in the list of technology 
advances, we juggled their relationships, we made changes in the types and values of 
military units, we adjusted the time length of turns, we curbed the danger presented 
by barbarians, and, most critically, we continually improved the artificial intelligence of 
the rival civilizations. 

Among the interesting features that didn’t make the final cuts were ocean minefields that 
could be laid by Ironclads; alcoholic beverages (proposed by some as a major impetus for the 
first permanent settlements); Solar Power Plants; Fighter-Bombers 8-8-8(32); the Super 
Highways Wonder that speeded road building; Charlemagne, king of the Franks; and a much 
more detailed spaceship. 

The most important feature that went in as the game neared completion was the concept 
of trade routes established by Caravans. This helped with the generation of knowledge and 
the establishment of strong economies. It also encouraged exploration and diplomacy. 

Also important was the home city concept, especially under the Republic or Democracy. 
Originally, military units cost $2 maintenance each under these governments, then only $1 if 
they were fortified or on sentry duty. When military units caused unhappiness instead, this 
seemed to work more as one would expect. It became more difficult to wage war under these 
governments and provided an interesting trade-off for the improved econornic performance. 

The last major feature to be included was the Space Race. We had tossed around several 
ideas for ending the game but eventually returned to space, one of the earliest ideas. Reaching 
another planet with colonists from Earth made an excellent culmination for the history of 
humankind on our planet. 

Like Railroad Tycoon, Civilization has been a great project to work on. In fact, important 
work has often been delayed because it was so much fun to play. Civilization has proven to be 
extraordinarily popular with our colleagues here at MPS Labs, and that’s a good sign. With 
so many cool features and interesting decisions, plus an endless supply of new worlds, we are 
certain that Civilization is the last game you'll ever need. But, just in case you disagree, we’ll 
start on something new as soon as this one goes out the door. 


Sid Meier 


Bruce Shelley 
September 11 ,1991 
